---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-27'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240827'

next: false
---

# 2024-08-29

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T83<br>♥ KQT43<br>♦ 752<br>♣ 95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. East is the dealer and opens 1♠. You have to decide what call to make.

You have only 5 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. That's not nearly enough to get involved in the auction.

West makes a limit raise to 3♠, inviting game. Partner, North, passes, and East continues to 4♠, accepting the invitation. You have another chance to make a call.

Naturally, you pass.

West and partner also pass, and the auction is over. You will have to choose the opening lead against East's 4♠ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

The choice of opening lead isn't difficult with this hand. With the K-Q-10 in an unbid suit, you don't need to look any further.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♥K, top of the touching cards from the broken sequence, and West puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q752<br>♥ 962<br>♦ KQ<br>♣ QJT8</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T83<br>♥ KQT43<br>♦ 752<br>♣ 95</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays a low heart from dummy, and partner plays the ♥A on your ♥K. Declarer follows with a low heart, and partner has won the first trick. Partner returns the ♥J, and declarer follows with another low heart. You have a decision to make. What are you playing to this trick?

Partner's play of overtaking with the ♥A and returning the suit makes it clear that partner started with only a doubleton heart. Partner didn't want to block the suit by letting your ♥K win the first trick. Then you might get only two tricks before declarer has an opportunity to discard a heart loser. You might let partner win the trick if there were something you wanted led from partner's side of the table, but that's not the case here. You overtake partner's ♥J with the ♥Q. Fortunately, you have the ♥10, so this doesn't cost a trick. That's one of the nice things about having a broken sequence rather than just touching honors. However, partner was presumably prepared to ruff the third round if you didn't hold the ♥10.

Having carefully unblocked the heart suit, you continue with the ♥10. You expect it to win the third trick since partner has shown a doubleton, and that's what happens as partner discards a low club while both dummy and declarer have to follow suit. What are you going to play now?

Your side has now won the first three tricks. You are at the critical point in the defense. Where is the fourth trick coming from?

Partner discarded a low club on the third round of hearts. So it appears you will have to get a trick from either diamonds or spades. You can hope partner holds the ace in one of those suits. If it's the ♠A, it's not going anywhere. If it's the ♠A, you don't want to give declarer an opportunity to discard any diamond loser on dummy's clubs. So it may seem best to lead a diamond at this point. Let's see what will happen.

Suppose you lead a diamond at trick four. You lead the ♦7, top of nothing, showing no interest in the suit from your side of the table. Dummy's ♦Q wins the trick as partner plays a low diamond. So much for that hope.

Declarer leads a low spade from dummy. Partner plays the ♠K and declarer wins the ♠A. Close. Partner held the ♠K instead of the ♠A. Too bad partner didn't hold that card.

Declarer draws your remaining trumps with the ♠Q and ♠J. Declarer then claims the rest of the tricks, making the 4♠ contract.

It's too bad declarer played the spades correctly, leading a low spade from dummy instead of the ♠Q. If declarer had led the ♠Q, partner would have covered with the ♠K and you would eventually get a trick with the ♠10. Was there anything else the defense could have done?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♥K, and partner overtakes with the ♥A, winning the first trick. Partner leads back the ♥J, and you overtake with the ♥Q, winning the second trick. The ♥10 wins the third trick as partner discards a low club. So far, so good. You've won the first three tricks. Partner has already made a discouraging attitude signal in clubs, so partner doesn't hold the ♣A. Could partner hold the ♦A?

No!

Holding the ♦A, partner should have taken it after winning the ♥A. There could be no downside taking it and it would clarify the defense. Partner's failure to play the ♦A before playing a second heart announces that partner has nothing in diamonds in addition to nothing in clubs. So there are no tricks coming from clubs or diamonds, and you have no more heart tricks. The setting trick will have to come from the trump suit.

There will be no problem if partner has the ♠A but, as you've seen, you may not get a trick if partner holds anything else. Is there anything you can do to improve your chances of getting a spade trick?

Yes. You can lead another heart!

This will give declarer a ruff and a sluff, but that is useless to declarer when there are no side suit losers. However, that gives you the potential for an uppercut if partner holds a spade honor.

Declarer ruffs in dummy with the ♠2, and partner ruffs with the ♠K. Declarer has no choice but to overruff with the ♠A. Declarer takes a trick with the ♠J, hoping your partner has another spade. Unfortunately for declarer, your partner shows out, discarding a low diamond. That confirms that partner doesn't have anything in diamonds. Declarer leads another spade, and your ♠8 forces out dummy's ♠Q. All of a sudden, your ♠10 has become the highest-ranking remaining trump.

Here are the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ T9864<br>♣ 76</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ <br>♦ KQ<br>♣ QJT8</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 96<br>♥ <br>♦ AJ<br>♣ AK4</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T<br>♥ 3<br>♦ 752<br>♣ 95</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer will eventually have to give you a trick with the ♠10. 4♠ is down one. Your side took three heart tricks **and** a trump trick.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K<br>♥ AJ<br>♦ T98643<br>♣ 7632</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q752<br>♥ 962<br>♦ QJT8<br>♣ KQ</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AJ964<br>♥ 875<br>♦ AJ<br>♣ AK4</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T83<br>♥ KQT43<br>♦ 752<br>♣ 95</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As a defender, once you determine that no further tricks are coming from the side suits, look to the trump suit. Consider uppercut possibilities with trump holdings that can be promoted if partner can trump something with a high trump. This may mean giving defender a ruff and a sluff, but just do it! Ruffs and sluffs are useless to declarer in this situation.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240829)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240827)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240829#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.