---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-21'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240921'

next:
  text: '2024-09-23'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240923'
---

# 2024-09-22

Today's column discusses when to overcall at the two level.

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

### Two-Level Overcalls

One-level overcalls can be made on as few as 7 points with a decent five-card or longer suit. The risk is typically minimal since auctions rarely stop at the one-level. Because a two-level overcall commits the partnership to an eight-trick contract and may end the auction, it requires more points and a better suit than a minimum one-level overcall.

Overcalling at the two level shows at least enough strength to open the bidding, about 12 or 13 points. Usually, a two-level overcall will be made on a six-card or longer suit, but a strong five-card suit is also acceptable.

Let's look at some examples for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 72<br>♥ KJ4<br>♦ J9<br>♣ AQJ863</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East opens the bidding 1♠ as dealer, and it is South's turn to call.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This is a classic 2♣ overcall. South has a strong six-card club suit, and 12 high-card points, plus 2 length points for the six-card suit. South could overcall 2♣ with a slightly weaker or stronger hand, or perhaps with one fewer club, but this is the sort of hand that should come to mind when thinking about a two-level overcall.

A two-level overcall shows the values to open the bidding, but that doesn't mean every hand worth an opening bid is also worth a two-level overcall.

Consider this hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A5<br>♥ JT9<br>♦ K8742<br>♣ A43</td>
	</tr>
</table>

If South had the opportunity to open the bidding, 1♦ would be automatic, with 12 high-card points, plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. Unfortunately, East has opened the bidding first.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

There may be some temptation to get into the auction, but South will do best to resist it. This diamond suit would be acceptable for a one-level overcall, but a two-level overcall requires a longer or stronger suit. Nor is South's hand suitable for a takeout double, with only two spades. Despite holding 13 points, it looks best for South to pass.

How about this hand?

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A7<br>♥ 632<br>♦ KJT954<br>♣ T8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

With both sides vulnerable, East opens 1♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The diamonds are longer and stronger, but South's hand has fewer points - only 8 high-card points, plus 2 length points for the six-card diamond suit. South's diamonds are easily strong enough for a 2♦ overcall, but South's hand lacks the strength for a two-level overcall. If South bids 2♦, North might get the partnership too high, expecting South to have a minimum of 12 or 13 points. A weak jump overcall of 3♦ would require a seventh diamond - at least at this vulnerability. Pass looks like the best call.

Here is another hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K8<br>♥ T6<br>♦ KJ43<br>♣ AQ952</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East opens the bidding 1♠ with neither side vulnerable.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With 13 high-card points, plus 1 length point for the five-card club suit, South doesn't want to pass. Holding two hearts makes the hand unsuitable for a takeout double of 1♠. so the only question is whether to overcall 2♣ or to pass. While a six-card or longer suit is preferred for a two-level overcall, a good five-card suit is sufficient, so South can overcall 2♣ with this hand.

Just because it is permissible to overcall at the two level on some five-card suits doesn't mean that you should leap at the opportunity to do so.

Consider this hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT8<br>♥ J<br>♦ KQ42<br>♣ A9753</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South does not need to consider overcalling with this hand. With at least three cards in all three unbid suits, the shape is more appropriate for a takeout double. Overcalling a five-card suit at the two level rather than making a takeout double, should be considered a secondary choice, and then only when the suit is very strong.

A two-level overcall has a higher minimum range than a one-level overcall, but they both share an upper limit of about 17 points.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A8<br>♥ KQ9<br>♦ AJT842<br>♣ AJ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Here, East opens the bidding 1♠, and South has 19 high-card points, plus 2 length points for the six-card diamond suit.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South is too strong to overcall 2♦. Rather than overcall, South can start with a takeout double. South's plan will be to bid diamonds on the next round of the auction, showing about 18 or more points and at least five diamonds.

A takeout double will not always be the alternative to a two-level overcall.

Suppose South holds this hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJ8<br>♥ KT9<br>♦ AQJ52<br>♣ K4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South's hand and the diamond suit are strong enough for a 2♦ overcall, but there is a better call available. 1NT is much more descriptive than 2♦. It shows 15-18 points, a balanced hand, and at least one stopper in hearts. North will be able to bid accurately over the 1NT overcall, and the strong diamond suit can likely be used as a source of tricks in whatever contract North-South end up in.

### Multiple Options

The previous hands all had one call that stood out from the rest, but sometimes there will be a close decision.

Consider this hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ KJ932<br>♦ A95<br>♣ KQ92</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has two choices: make a takeout double and suppress the five-card heart suit, or overcall a mediocre five-card heart suit. If the five-card suit were a minor, double would be the best choice. However, it is generally more important to show length in a major suit than in a minor. Both 2♥ - emphasizing the heart suit - and double - keeping all the suits in play - are reasonable options.

Sometimes South will be faced with the choice of overcalling a five-card suit or making a takeout double with three cards in two unbid suits.

Take this hand, for example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 72<br>♥ KQ4<br>♦ KJT83<br>♣ A92</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Doubling makes it easy to play in hearts or clubs, but it risks getting to a 4-3 fit when there is a 5-3 or even 5-4 fit in diamonds. The diamonds are strong enough to make overcalling on a five-card suit a viable alternative. Doubling looks slightly better, but this is partly a matter of style. Some players will be more comfortable overcalling 2♦ than doubling.

Occasionally, there will be more than two options available.

Consider this hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 85<br>♥ AK92<br>♦ KT843<br>♣ A9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has three options available - each as bad as the last. Should South pass with 14 high-card points and 1 length point for the  ive-card diamond suit, or overcall 2♦ on a poor five-card suit, or double with only a doubleton club?

This is mainly a question of picking one's poison. Make a call and hope partner has a suitable hand for your choice.

### Summary

Overcalling at the two level is a more difficult topic than overcalling at the one-level. There are lots of hands that will present problems of whether to overcall or take some other action. You will be off to a good start if you limit your two-level overcalls to hands with enough strength to open the bidding and good suits - preferably six-card or longer suits.

## Questions

### 01

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ8<br>♥ 5<br>♦ KQJ532<br>♣ J92</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♦**

South has a model 2♦ overcall: an opening hand with a strong six-card diamond suit. There is a wide range of less perfect hands with which South might overcall 2♦, but this is about as good as it gets.

### 02

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, and North-South are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q7<br>♥ A32<br>♦ A93<br>♣ Q8754</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass**

Despite holding 12 high-card points, plus 1 length point, for the five-card club suit, South has no better option available than pass. The distribution is unsuitable for a takeout double, and the clubs are far too weak for a two-level overcall.

### 03

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ4<br>♥ J52<br>♦ A3<br>♣ KQT96</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1NT**

South's club suit is sufficient for a five-card overcall at the two level, but there is a better call available to South. 1NT shows a balanced hand with spades stopped and 15-18 points - a slightly stronger range than a 1NT opening.

### 04

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJ2<br>♥ KQ3<br>♦ 42<br>♣ AJT43</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double (2♣)**

South has two possible options: overcalling 2♣ and making a takeout double. Doubling looks a bit better with this hand, because the clubs are not outstanding. If South had a stronger club suit, the decision would be closer.

### 05

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K8<br>♥ 732<br>♦ 64<br>♣ KQT742</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass**

South has a strong club suit, but there is no convenient way to introduce the suit. South is about 3 points short for a 2♣ overcall - with only 8 high-card points, plus 2 length points for the six-card club suit - and is a club short for a weak jump overcall of 3♣.

### 06

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ KJ4<br>♦ K8543<br>♣ AK87</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

It would be possible to overcall 2♦ with this distribution if the diamond suit was very strong. In most cases, however, a takeout double will be the best choice. With this hand, doubling is clear, because the diamond suit is so weak.

### 07

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT7<br>♥ A4<br>♦ K9<br>♣ AKQ732</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

South is too strong to overcall 2♣，despite the strong six-card suit. South can start with a takeout double, planning on bidding the club suit on the next round, showing about 18 or more points and a five-card or longer club suit.

### 08

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 72<br>♥ A8<br>♦ KQ832<br>♣ KJ94</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♦ (Pass)**

South's distribution is inappropriate for a takeout double, so the choice is between 2♦ and pass. Overcalling a five-card suit at the two level is not an ideal action, but with a sound hand with a reasonable five-card suit, 2♦ looks like the best call.

### 09

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, North-South are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 8<br>♥ QJ952<br>♦ K932<br>♣ AQ4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♥ (Double)**

If South's long suit were a minor, then making a takeout double would be appropriate. Major suits have higher priority than minor suits, however, so with this hand, 2♥ is perfectly reasonable.

### 10

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT83<br>♥ K2<br>♦ A9<br>♣ KJ754</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double (Pass, 2♣)**

This is a nightmare hand for South. Any of the possible actions could work well or badly. South might overcall 2♣ on a so-so five-card suit, make a takeout double with imperfect distribution, or pass with sound opening values. This is a question of style - each partnership can choose which is least painful for them.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240922)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240918)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240925)

### By Date

Use the links below.