---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240912'

next: false
---

# 2024-09-13

On this deal, can your side take all your winners in time?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A52<br>♥ T986<br>♦ K6<br>♣ 6532</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South with both sides vulnerable. East is the dealer and opens 1NT. You have your first opportunity to make a call.

With only 7 high-card points, you have nothing to think about.

West responds 2♣, the Stayman convention. Your partner, North, passes, and East replies 2♦, showing no four-card major. The auction is back to you.

Again, you have nothing to say.

Responder jumps to 3NT. Partner and East both pass. You have your last chance to make a call. 

Naturally, you pass, and the auction is over. You are now on lead against East's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

With no natural suits bid by the opposition, you usually lead your longest suit against 3NT.

Here, you have two four-card suits. You have your first decision. Which suit should you lead?

The hearts are stronger and contain a nice sequence, although there aren't any of the top cards. Even though West used the Stayman convention, West may have been interested in spades and not hearts. Also, East doesn't have a four-card major so there's an inference that East has length in the minor suits.

Let's assume you lead the ♥10, top of the solid sequence.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♥10, and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q764<br>♥ Q54<br>♦ QJ4<br>♣ AKT</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A52<br>♥ T986<br>♦ K6<br>♣ 6532</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

West has a four-card major, but it is spades, not hearts. Some players may not have bothered using the Stayman convention with 4=3=3=3 distribution. That's quite a dummy, 14 high-card points. Declarer has about 16, and you have 7. That leaves partner with at most 3 or 4 points.

Dummy's ♥Q wins the first trick as partner plays the ♥2 and declarer plays the ♥J. The ♥2 is a discouraging attitude signal. That's not surprising since declarer must hold the ♥A and ♥K, otherwise, partner would have covered the ♥Q.

Declarer leads the ♦Q from dummy. Partner follows with the ♦2. Declarer plays the ♦5, and you win the ♦K.

When declarer is first leading a suit, and your card is not needed to help win the trick, you typically give a count signal. So partner's ♦2 looks like the start of a low-high count signal, showing an odd number of diamonds, presumably three or five. Which is more likely?

If partner holds five diamonds, declarer would have only three. It's unlikely declarer is establishing a short suit. Also, declarer doesn't have four cards in either major and is likely to have length in one or both minor suits. So it seems likely declarer started with five diamonds.

You are now at the critical point on defense. You must decide what to lead next.

To help decide, it's useful to consider how close declarer is to having enough tricks to make the contract. How many tricks is declarer likely to have on regaining the lead?

Nine!

You already know declarer has three heart tricks, and you can see the two club tricks in dummy. Assuming declarer started with a five-card diamond suit and was taking a finesse, declarer now has four established diamond winners. If declarer regains the lead, declarer has enough tricks to make the contract. To defeat the contract, you need to take the next four tricks. Which suit offers that possibility?

Spades. That's the only suit left.

Partner will need four spades, including the ♠K and ♠J. Is that possible?

Yes.

Declarer denied four spades and could have only a doubleton. Also, you've already determined that partner could have three or four points.

Having decided that switching to spades is the best chance to defeat the contract, does it matter which spade you lead?

Yes.

Let's see what will happen if you switch to the ♠A.

Suppose you lead the ♠A at trick three. Declarer plays a low spade from dummy, partner plays the ♠3, and declarer follows with the ♠8. That doesn't seem too encouraging. Partner has played the lowest outstanding spade. Should you try another suit?

No.

Not only have you already decided that the spade suit represents the only chance to defeat the contract, but partner may not be able to afford an encouraging card. Partner can only signal with a choice of cards to play. Partner usually can't afford to signal with a potential winner.

So let's assume you continue with another spade. Declarer plays low from dummy, and partner plays the ♠J, winning the trick as declarer follows with the ♠10. Excellent, partner does have a good spade holding. 

Unfortunately, partner is now on lead and there is no entry back to your hand. The best partner can do is take a trick with the ♠K. Dummy's ♠Q is now a winner. Whatever partner leads next, declarer has the rest of the tricks, just making the 3NT contract.

At least, your switch to spades prevented declarer from making any overtricks. But could the defense have done better?

Let's go back.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♥10, dummy's ♥Q wins the trick as partner plays a discouraging ♥2 and declarer the ♥J. You now know declarer also holds the ♥A and ♥K. Dummy's ♦Q is led and you win with the ♦K. What next?

From the available clues, you've determined that you need to take four spade tricks if you are to defeat the contract. Even if partner does have a suitable holding in spades, you will need to trap dummy's ♠Q. As you've seen, it won't be good enough to trap the ♠Q once, you will need to trap it twice. How can you do that?

You need to switch to a low spade!

That will preserve the ♠A as an entry back to your hand.

Let's see how that works on this deal. Declarer plays low from dummy, and partner wins the ♠J as declarer follows with the ♠8. That's what you were hoping to see. Since partner's ♠J won the trick, partner is pretty sure that you must hold the ♠A. Partner leads back a low spade. Declarer plays the ♠10, and you win the ♠A.

This is the position you wanted to be in. You've already trapped dummy's ♠Q once, and now you are back on lead. You can lead your remaining spade, hoping to trap the ♠Q a second time. Declarer plays low from dummy, and partner wins with the ♠9 as declarer shows out, discarding a club. Success! Partner takes a trick with the ♠K. That's the fifth trick for the defense.

Whatever partner leads next, declarer has the rest of the tricks. However, you've won the race. You got five tricks before declarer could get nine. 3NT is down one. Your side won one diamond and **four** spade tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJ93<br>♥ 732<br>♦ 932<br>♣ 984</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q764<br>♥ Q54<br>♦ QJ4<br>♣ AKT</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T8<br>♥ AKJ<br>♦ AT875<br>♣ QJ7</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A52<br>♥ T986<br>♦ K6<br>♣ 6532</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Defending against 3NT is usually a race. The defense is trying to get five tricks before declarer can get nine. If you can determine that declarer has nine tricks but you have the lead, you must look for a way to take your side's tricks before declarer regains the lead. If necessary, you have to imagine what cards might reasonably lie in partner's hand that will give you the tricks you need.

On this deal, your detective work tells you that your side will need to take four spade tricks to defeat the contract. So you will need to find partner with four spades headed by the ♠K-J. But that's not quite enough. With the ♠Q in dummy, you will have to play the suit in a manner such that you can still take four tricks. That requires you lead a low spade away from your ♠A.

There is a saying, "Don't lead away from an ace." However, that doesn't apply when defending against a notrump contract, or even defending against a suit when it is necessary to defeat the contract.

Notice you didn't need partner to also hold the ♠10. If partner has four spades, declarer has only two and they'll fall on the first two tricks. Then you need partner's third spade only to be higher than dummy's ♠7, providing you are on lead to trap dummy's remaining ♠Q-7.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240913)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240910)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240913#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.