---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-21'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240821'

next:
  text: '2024-08-23'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240823'
---

# 2024-08-22

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ<br>♥ AQJT98<br>♦ 2<br>♣ AKQJ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

You have 23 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit. With ten tricks in your own hand, you start with a strong artificial 2♣ opening.

West passes, and partner, North, responds 2♦, an artificial waiting bid. East passes, and you have to decide what to do next.

You can conveniently show your six-card heart suit. There's no danger of being passed since the strength of your hand is unlimited.

West passes, and partner now bids 3♦. Your partnership agreement is that partner would bid 3♣, cheaper minor negative, with a very weak hand. So 3♦ shows a reasonable diamond suit and some values, but not enough to make an immediate positive response of 3♦. East passes, and you have to decide what to do next.

With partner showing some values, the partnership is committed to at least game, and slam is a possibility. You can show your second suit and see what partner has to say next.

West passes, and partner gives preference to 4♥. East passes, and you have another chance to make a call.

Since partner has shown some values, slam is still a possibility. You can ask about aces using the Blackwood convention.

West passes, and partner replies 5♦, showing one ace playing standard responses. If the partnership uses Key Card Blackwood, partner makes the appropriate response to show one key card. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Using standard methods, you might try for a grand slam by bidding 5NT since you know the partnership has all the aces. However, partner is unlikely to have all the cards you need or partner might have made an initial positive response. So let's settle for a small slam in hearts. If the partnership uses Key Card Blackwood, you would know that a key card is missing and a grand slam is out of the question.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 6♥ with West on
lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>5♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>6♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦K. Partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 86<br>♥ 75<br>♦ AJ8743<br>♣ 732</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ<br>♥ AQJT98<br>♦ 2<br>♣ AKQJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner doesn't have anything more than the reasonable diamond suit, so you have some work to do. Even in slam, the first planning step is to consider the potential losers. There is a potential heart loser since you are missing the ♥K. There are no diamond or club losers, but there is a potential spade loser since you are missing the ♠K. That's two potential losers, a heart and a spade, and you can afford only one.

You might be able to avoid the heart loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♥K.

Similarly, you might be able to avoid the spade loser with the help of
a finesse if East holds the ♠K.

So it looks as though you can make the contract if either the heart finesse or the spade finesse works. The odds of one of the two finesses working are 75%, which would make this a pretty good slam. However, is there a problem?

Yes!

You have only one entry to dummy, the ♦A, and you are going to have to use it right away since West has led the ♦K. You won't be able to try both finesses. You can try only one. Is it a guess which finesse to take?

Let's see what will happen if you decide to stake everything on the heart finesse.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦K, and you have to win the first trick with dummy's ♦A.

Suppose you decide to try the heart finesse. You lead a heart from dummy and, when East follows with a low heart, you finesse the ♥Q. West follows with a low heart. Success! It looks as though you have chosen the right finesse to take.

However, there's still a problem. With no more entries to dummy, you can't repeat the finesse. There's no choice but to hope East started with a doubleton ♥K. When you play the ♥A, however, only low hearts appear from both defenders. You are going to have to lose a trick to the ♥K.

Since you can't reach dummy to try the spade finesse, the 6♥ contract is going down one.

You chose the heart finesse and it worked, but you still couldn't make the contract. Let's go back and try again.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♦K, and you win dummy's ♦A.

As you have seen, taking the heart finesse may not be good enough, even if it works. You need East to hold a singleton or doubleton ♥K. What about the spade finesse?

If it works, you don't need anything else to make the contract. Let's see.

At trick two, you lead a spade from dummy and, when East follows with a low spade, you try a finesse by playing the ♠Q. Success! The finesse works as West follows with a low spade.

The contract is now secure. With the spade finesse working, you can afford to lose a heart trick. You play the ♥A and both defenders follow suit. You continue with the ♥Q, and East wins the ♥K as West follows with a low heart. There is only one trump outstanding.

East leads a diamond, and you ruff with the ♥8. You draw the defenders' last trump. You are now left with nothing but winners in your hand, making the 6♥ contract.

You lost a heart trick, but that was all.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 86<br>♥ 75<br>♦ AJ8743<br>♣ 732</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J9432<br>♥ 62<br>♦ KQT9<br>♣ T8</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KT75<br>♥ K43<br>♦ 65<br>♣ 9654</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ<br>♥ AQJT98<br>♦ 2<br>♣ AKQJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In dummy for the last time at trick one, you have no choice but to try either the heart or the spade finesse. The spade finesse is clearly better. If it works, you give up a heart and that's the end of it. One finesse, a straight 50% chance. If you lead a heart, you will need to find East with a singleton or doubleton ♥K. That's only 16% as you can't repeat the finesse.

50% better than 16%!

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240822)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240819)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240823)

### By Date

Use the links below.