---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-17'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240917'

next: false
---

# 2024-09-18

Today's quiz is based on Audrey Grant Improving Your Judgment 2: Doubles - The Takeout Double - Part 2.

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

### More on the Takeout Double

When an opponent opens the bidding, there are two standard ways to compete. You can make a simple overcall suggesting a trump suit, or you can use a takeout double to ask partner to choose the suit.

A simple overcall in a suit has a range of about 7-17 points, depending on the level and vulnerability. It is not forcing and partner could pass with as many as 8 or more points with no support. An overcall of 1NT shows about 15-18 points.

A takeout double has a range starting at about 13 points with no upper limit. You are asking partner to bid, so it is forcing in the sense that you will get another opportunity to bid. This difference allows you to use the takeout double to show hands too strong for a
simple overcall:

- Start with a takeout double
- Describe the true nature of the hand at the next opportunity

For example, you are sitting South with this hand and East opens the bidding 1♥.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKJ976<br>♥ A3<br>♦ 65<br>♣ KQJ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With 18 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit, this hand is too strong for a simple overcall of 1♠. Partner might pass with 5 or 6 points and a game could be missed. Instead, start with a takeout double.

Partner will assume that you have the classic hand for a takeout double and will choose one of the unbid suits, 2♦ for example.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You will now clarify the nature of the hand by bidding 2♠, showing a hand too strong for an overcall of 1♠.

Here's another example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K5<br>♥ AKJ<br>♦ QT73<br>♣ KJ52</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East opens 1♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With 19 high-card points, the hand is too strong for a simple overcall of 1NT, which would show a balanced hand of about 15-18 points. Instead, start with a takeout double.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

After partner responds, for example with 1♠, rebid 1NT... showing a hand stronger than a 1NT overcall, about 19-21 points. Partner, can pass with nothing and raise to 3NT with enough for game.

The concept of starting with a takeout double to show a hand too strong to make a simple overcall falls in line with the idea that the stronger the hand, the less critical it is to have support for all the unbid suits. If you are strong enough to double and bid again, you don't need support for everything partner might choose to bid.

### Watch out for Wasted Values

The more strength is concentrated in the unbid suits, the more suitable the hand is for a takeout double.

This hand has 13 high-card points but there is wasted strength in the opponent's suit.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJ<br>♥ K753<br>♦ Q962<br>♣ AJ5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The ♠Q and ♠J are unlikely to be of much value if your side gets to play the contract. They would be more suitable for defense. Pass.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJ<br>♥ K753<br>♦ Q962<br>♣ AJ5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

This hand has the same cards but the ♠Q and ♠J have been exchanged for the ♥Q and ♦J.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 32<br>♥ KQ75<br>♦ QJ96<br>♣ AJ5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This hand is much preferable for a takeout double. The high cards are better placed for whichever trump suit partner chooses.

### Takeout or Penalty

Even an experienced partnership needs to know whether a double is for takeout or for penalty. There can be doubles of low-level contracts that are meant for penalty and doubles of high-level contracts that are meant for takeout. It is best for the partnership to have some general agreements that cover most situations.

The suggested agreement is to treat all doubles for takeout except those that the partnership specifically agrees are for penalty.

There are two situations when a double is usually agreed to be for penalty:

- Doubles of an opening notrump bid
- Doubles of high-level contracts

When an opponent opens with a notrump bid, to make a takeout double you would need support for all four unbid suits, which means you would be unlikely to have four-card support for the suit partner chooses. Since the notrump opener has a strong hand, it would be dangerous to compete on that basis. So, a double of an opening notrump bid is traditionally for penalty, showing a hand that is as strong as the opening notrump bid, or stronger, and partner is expected to leave the double in for penalties except with a very distributional hand. A successful penalty double of a notrump opening bid is rare, however, so many partnerships prefer to assign a conventional meaning to this double instead.

Doubles of high-level contracts are much more common. The precise level at which doubles turn from takeout to penalty is open to debate. One standard agreement is that doubles of natural suit bids through the level of 4♥ are for takeout and doubles of 4♠ or higher are for penalty. The higher the level the more the partnership should consider converting even an intended takeout double to penalty by passing. It may be easier to take four or more tricks on defense than to make a 10- or 11-trick contract.

On some hands, the logic of the auction indicates that a double is meant for penalty, not takeout.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A3<br>♥ QJT8<br>♦ AQ9<br>♣ T865</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In this auction, South's double is for penalty, even if the partnership's agreement is that doubles are for takeout through 4♥. If South wanted to make a takeout double of hearts, showing the unbid suits, South would have doubled on the first round and not waited until the opponents reached the game level.

### Over or Under?

Even if the partnership agreement is that a double of 4♠ or higher is for penalty, there's still a significant difference between when the doubler is over the declarer or under.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 3<br>♥ JT983<br>♦ Q85<br>♣ KJ86</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Here, for example, West opens a preemptive 4♠, and partner, North, doubles.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>4♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

North is sitting over the opening 4♠ bidder and is well placed to make a penalty double. North could easily have something like ♠A-Q-10 and a couple of other high cards. Most experts play this double to show convertible values - enough to defeat 4♠ but also support for the unbid suits in case partner takes out the double. However, you should only remove the double with a very distributional hand.

Here you hold the same hand as the previous example but the auction is different.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 3<br>♥ JT983<br>♦ Q85<br>♣ KJ86</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East opens the bidding 1♠. You aren't strong enough for a takeout double and pass. West raises to 4♠ and partner, North, doubles. East passes and it's up to you.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

North is unlikely to have a strong holding in the spade suit. The opponents have shown a fit and North is not well placed to take tricks in the spade suit. Even a holding such as ♠A-Q-10 may take only one spade trick since the opening bidder is on North's left and may hold both the ♠K and ♠J to trap the ♠Q and ♠10. Instead, North's double is likely based on high cards in the other three suits. That makes it more reasonable for you to take out the double with an unbalanced hand.

## Questions

### 01

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKJ73<br>♥ J84<br>♦ K52<br>♣ 85</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1♠**

You do have support for the unbid suits but, with such a concentration of length and strength in the spade suit, an overcall is more descriptive than a takeout double.

### 02

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK62<br>♥ KQJ973<br>♦ 2<br>♣ A4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

You don't have support for diamonds but the hand is too strong for a simple overcall of 1♥. If partner bids diamonds, you intend to bid hearts, showing a strong hand with hearts.

### 03

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQT<br>♥ AT93<br>♦ AKQ9<br>♣ J8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

There is no upper limit to the strength for a takeout double. Despite the inadequate support for clubs, you are strong enough to bid notrump if partner chooses clubs. That shows a hand too strong to overcall 1NT.

### 04

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q2<br>♥ Q52<br>♦ K742<br>♣ AJ54</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass**

You have support for the unbid suits and have 12 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton spade. Nonetheless, you must exercise some judgment. The ♠Q is unlikely to be worth much; partner would be forced to bid at the two level; and you have only three-card support for hearts... the suit partner is most likely to bid with a choice of four-card suits.

### 05

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ4<br>♥ K4<br>♦ J75<br>♣ AKQJ6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3NT**

You could double, but that is likely to get the partnership beyond the most likely game contract for your side... 3NT. Better to overcall 3NT and hope partner has a couple of useful high cards. You can expect partner to hold at least 6 or 7 points when an opponent preempts.

### 06

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKJ2<br>♥ 73<br>♦ AT642<br>♣ K6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

Tough hand. Too much to pass but overcalling 4♦ could land you in a poor spot. Double will work well if partner bids spades or diamonds. If partner bids clubs, you might feel uncomfortable putting down the dummy.

### 07

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 95<br>♥ AJT6<br>♦ AKJ42<br>♣ 86</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

This shows support for the unbid suits, diamonds and hearts, and willingness to compete at the two level or higher. If you overcall 2♦, a heart fit might get lost.

### 08

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A6<br>♥ AQJT8<br>♦ J843<br>♣ 72</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♥**

Although you could double to show both hearts and diamonds, this hand is more heart-oriented. It's probably best to emphasize the hearts with an overcall and forget about the diamonds.

### 09

You are South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K84<br>♥ QJ85<br>♦ K74<br>♣ AT6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass**

The standard agreement is that a direct double of a 1NT opening bid is for penalty, not for takeout. In general, its dangerous to come into the auction with a balanced hand when the opponent on your right has shown a strong balanced hand and the opponent on your left could have values. Bidding over an opponent's opening 1NT bid is usually safer with an unbalanced hand.

### 10

You are South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK<br>♥ QJT9<br>♦ T82<br>♣ AT65</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

Despite holding 14 high-card points, you don't have any suitable competitive action over East's opening bid. You aren't strong enough to overcall 1NT. You don't have a five-card suit to overcall and don't have the required spade support to make a takeout double. The best action was to pass and await developments. When East bids 4♥, now you can enter the auction with a penalty double. Partner will know your double is for penalty because you didn't make a takeout double on the first round.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240918)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240915)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240918#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.