---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-13'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240913'

next:
  text: '2024-09-15'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240915'
---

# 2024-09-14

On this deal, are you playing the cards in the right order?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 97<br>♥ AK642<br>♦ A654<br>♣ 63</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Suppose you are dealer sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

With only 11 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit, some might pass with this hand. However, it has three quick tricks, the ♥A-K and ♦A. It also meets the Guideline of 20: 11 high-card points plus 5 hearts plus 4 diamonds = 20. So let's go with opening 1♥.

West overcalls 1♠. Partner, North, responds 2♣. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

With only a doubleton club and no spade stopper, you can simply bid the second suit, diamonds.

West passes, and partner now cuebids 2♠. East passes, and it's back to you to make a call.

Partner could have a variety of hands to cuebid the opponent's suit. Usually, partner is hoping South can bid notrump with a stopper in the opponent's suit. With no spade stopper, you could give preference back to partner's club suit. With only two low clubs and a decent five-card heart suit, however, the most descriptive bid is probably to rebid the hearts. Let's go with that.

West passes, and partner raises to 4♥. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Naturally, you have nothing more to say.

West also passes, ending the auction. You are now the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦10, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A84<br>♥ Q75<br>♦ QJ2<br>♣ A875</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 97<br>♥ AK642<br>♦ A654<br>♣ 63</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has an opening bid with three-card heart support. It looks as though you've reached a good contract.

In planning the play in a suit contract, you start by considering the potential losers you have in 4♥. You won't have any heart losers if the five missing hearts are divided 3-2. If they are divided 4-1 or 5-0, you are unlikely to be able to handle the contract. You will be left with a potential spade loser once dummy's ♣A is gone. You have two potential diamond losers, even though West has led the ♦10. You will have two diamond winners no matter what East plays to the first trick, but there will still be two diamond losers in your hand to take care of. You will be left with a club loser in your hand after dummy's ♣A is gone. So, even if you don't have any heart losers, you still have four potential losers: a spade, two diamonds, and a club. You must eliminate one of them.

You can't do anything about the spade or club losers. So you will have to focus on losing only one diamond trick.

There won't be a problem if the six missing diamonds in the defenders' hands are divided exactly 3-3. You will lose only one diamond trick. But what if they are divided 4-2, as is more likely?

Since you can't establish any spade or club winners on which to discard a diamond, the only possibility is to plan to ruff a diamond in dummy. What is the problem with that idea?

You have only three trumps in dummy. If you draw all the defenders' trumps, you won't have a trump left in dummy to ruff a diamond. If you don't draw trumps, then a defender with only two diamonds will either be able to overruff or perhaps ruff and promote a trump winner for the defense. In this type of situation, the usual plan is to hope the defender with a doubleton diamond has only a doubleton heart. You can then plan to draw only two rounds of trumps before trying to ruff a diamond loser. Will that work on this deal?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦10. Right away, you are at a critical point in the play. What are you playing from dummy?

West's lead helps you trap the ♦K if it is with East. If West has the ♦K, an honor played from dummy will win the trick. So you start by playing one of dummy's honors. Let's see what will happen.

Suppose you play dummy's ♦J. East plays the ♦K. What are you playing from your hand?

It looks as though you should win the ♦A, in case West started with a singleton diamond. What next?

Suppose you start by drawing two rounds of trumps. Both defenders follow when you lead a trump to dummy's ♥Q. Good start. Both defenders also follow suit when you lead a trump back to the ♥K. That's good. The defenders' hearts have divided 3-2. There is still one trump outstanding but, if you draw it, you won't be able to do anything with your fourth diamond if the diamonds don't break. So it's time to play on diamonds.

If the defenders' diamonds were originally divided 3-3, you can simply draw the last trump since your last diamond will be a winner. You play a diamond to dummy's ♦Q. Both defenders follow suit. That's promising. If both defenders follow to the next round of diamonds, your last diamond will be a winner. You lead a third round of diamonds and East wins the trick with the ♦7. West shows out, however. The defenders' diamonds have divided 4-2 and East still has a high diamond remaining. It's a good thing you left a heart in dummy.

East, however, isn't going to give you that chance. East returns the defenders' last heart, removing the last trump from dummy.

You still have your second diamond loser and, together with a spade loser and club loser, you are going to lose four tricks. 4♥ is down one.

You found the defender with four diamonds also holding three hearts, but it didn't do any good.

What if you give up the diamond before drawing trumps?

Let's see.

## Another Possible Play

West leads the ♦10. You play the ♦J from dummy. East plays the ♦K, and you win the ♦A.

Let's suppose you decide to play on diamonds immediately. If they turn out to be divided 3-3, you won't have any problem. You can draw the defenders' trumps and, if they divide 3-2, all you will lose will be a diamond, a spade, and a club.

You lead a diamond to dummy's ♦Q. Both defenders follow suit. You lead a third round of diamonds, giving up a trick. East wins the trick with the ♦7 as West shows out, discarding a spade. The defenders' diamonds have divided 4-2. You now look to be okay since you still have trumps in dummy to take care of the diamond loser.

East, however, leads a fourth round of diamonds before you are ready. You have to follow suit but West ruffs with the ♥9. You can't let West win the trick or you'll have four losers, so you overruff with dummy's ♥Q. At least you no longer have a second diamond loser.

The defenders now have only four trumps remaining. You'll be okay if they are divided 2-2. You play a heart to the ♥K. Both defenders follow suit. There are only two hearts outstanding. You play the ♥A. East follows suit, but West shows out. Unfortunately, East still has a high heart remaining.

You've already lost a diamond trick and still have to lose a heart, a spade, and a club. Down one again.

So, with diamonds dividing 4-2, there doesn't seem to be a way to make the contract. Even though the defender with the doubleton diamond, West, also has only a doubleton heart, it doesn't seem to work to draw two rounds of trumps and then give up the third round of diamonds. It also doesn't work to draw no trumps and give up the third round of diamonds.

When this actual deal was played, sitting South was Italian star, Pietro Forquet, playing with Benito Garozzo. Let's see how Forquet played the contract.

## Recommended Play

Forquet got the opening lead of the ♦10 and played the ♦J from dummy. East played the ♦K.

Forquet considered the situation. Assuming the defenders' hearts were divided 3-2, Forquet could see that the contract would be secure if the defenders' diamonds were divided 3-3. If the defenders' diamonds were divided 5-1, there was nothing he could do. So he focused on the possibility that the defenders' diamonds were divided 4-2. If that were the case, Forquet could see the problem with winning the diamond and playing two rounds of trumps before giving up a diamond. He could also see the problem with winning the diamond and then giving up a diamond before playing any trumps. So he found the solution.

He let East's ♦K win the trick!

He knew he had to lose a diamond trick anyway, so this was the time to do it. Forquet was then in control, no matter what the defenders did.

East switched to a spade, and he won dummy's ♠A. He drew a round of trumps with dummy's ♥Q. Both defenders followed with low hearts. He drew a second round of trumps with the ♥K. Again, both defenders followed suit. First hurdle dealt with. The defenders' hearts had divided 3-2. There was only one trump outstanding.

It was time to test the diamonds. He played a diamond to dummy's ♦Q. Both defenders followed, so the diamonds were divided no worse than 4-2. He led dummy's last diamond and, when East followed suit, he played the ♦A. If West followed suit, there would be no need to ruff a diamond. He could simply draw the last trump and take his winners. If West was out of diamonds and ruffed with the last trump, too bad. The contract could never be made.

On the actual deal, West was out of diamonds. The defenders' diamonds had divided 4-2. However, West was also out of hearts. West had started with only two hearts. He led the remaining diamond loser and ruffed with dummy's remaining trump. East had to follow suit with the last diamond.

With the diamond loser eliminated, Forquet could give up a spade trick. He ruffed the next round of spades. Finally, he drew East's remaining trump. He still had a trump winner. And a trick with dummy's ♣A.

The last trick belonged to the opponents, but Forquet had made the 4♥ contract. He lost only a spade, a club, and **one** diamond trick... the first one.

## The Rest of the Story

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A84<br>♥ Q75<br>♦ QJ2<br>♣ A875</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJT653<br>♥ J9<br>♦ T8<br>♣ KJ4</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q2<br>♥ T83<br>♦ K973<br>♣ QT92</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 97<br>♥ AK642<br>♦ A654<br>♣ 63</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Forquet's play of ducking the first diamond catered to the defenders' diamonds being divided 3-3 or 4-2 with the hand with the doubleton diamond also holding a doubleton heart - which was the actual lie of the cards. An excellent example of timing by an expert player.

Equally interesting was what happened at the second table where the other Italian pair - with Giorgio Belladonna and Walter Avarelli, two more members of the famous Italian Blue Team - was defending against 4♥ with the East-West hands. At that table, Belladonna led the ♦10, declarer played the ♦J from dummy, but the contract was defeated!

We'll never know if declarer would have found the same play as Forquet if Avarelli had played the ♦K because... Avarelli played a low diamond, allowing dummy's ♦J to win!

Once Averelli played a low diamond at trick one, the contract could no longer be made. After winning the ♦J, declarer tried playing the ♦A and another diamond, but Avarelli won the ♦K and led a fourth round of diamonds. Belladonna ruffed with the ♥9, promoting Avarelli's ♥10 into an eventual winner.

Pietri Forquet was an original member of the Italian Blue Team - Squadra Azzura - which dominated bridge in the 50s and 60s. Forquet won 15 World Championships, second only to Giorgio Belladonna's 16 World Championships.

Forquet was unflappable at the table. He once reached a makeable 7♠ contract but his partner converted to 7NT. The went down several tricks, doubled, as the opponents ran their long suit in which neither Forquet nor his partner had a stopper. Forquet said not a word, and the partnership went on to win the match.

No one was more dedicated to the game than Forquet, but even his iron discipline was once taxed by the demands of championship bridge. He was married on the eve of the 1964 Olympiad championship and his coach, Carlo Alberto Perroux, ordered separate bedrooms for the bride and groom until the tournament was over!

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240914)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240912)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240916)

### By Date

Use the links below.