---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-11'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240811'

next:
  text: '2024-08-13'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240813'
---

# 2024-08-12

In this deal, can you establish all the tricks you need?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ AK72<br>♥️ KT6<br>♦️ A843<br>♣️ Q9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South with both sides vulnerable. As the dealer, you have the first opportunity to open the bidding. .

There are 16 high-card points and the hand is balanced. It falls in the middle of the 15-17 range for an opening bid of 1NT.

West passes. North raises to 3NT, and East passes. The auction is back to you.

Partner's raise to game is a signoff bid. You are expected to pass.

West passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥️4.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ 84<br>♥️ QJ5<br>♦️ Q62<br>♣️ KJT84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ AK72<br>♥️ KT6<br>♦️ A843<br>♣️ Q9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Dummy comes down with a balanced hand and 9 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card club suit.

You need nine tricks in 3NT. In a notrump contract, begin making a plan by counting the sure winners you have. You start with two spade winners, your ♠️A and ♠️K. You don't start with any sure heart winners but West has led a heart. Whatever East plays to the first trick, you are guaranteed at least one heart winner. There are no sure club winners since the opponents hold the ♣️A. There is one sure diamond winner, your ♦️A. That's a total of four sure winners: two spades, one heart, and one diamond. Five more winners are needed to make the 3NT contract.

You aren't likely to get any extra tricks from spades.

The heart suit offers the posibility of creating a second trick through promotion. You can drive out the opponents' ♥️A if it isn't played by East on the first trick.

You can also promote four club winners by driving out the opponents' ♣️A.

The diamond suit offers the chance for an extra trick with the help of a finesse. You can lead a diamond toward dummy, hoping West started with the ♦️K, a 50% chance. You might also get an extra trick through length if the six missing diamonds divide exactly 3-3. That's against the odds, only about a 36% chance.

With more than one possibility for establishing the extra winners needed, you want to go with those offering the best odds. Promotion is a sure thing, provided you can afford to give up the lead and then regain it. So a combination of promotion in hearts and clubs should provide you with the tricks you need.

Are there any other concerns?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥️4. Suppose you play a low heart from dummy. East plays the ♥️8 and you can win with the ♥️10. That's one of the heart tricks you were expecting.

You want to promote the club winners you need. You start with the ♣️Q, high card from the short side. Both defenders follow with low clubs. The defenders are holding up their ♣️A. You lead your remaining club. When West follows with a low club, you overtake with dummy's ️♣️10. You don't want to be left in your hand if the defenders hold up the ️♣️A a second time. East, however, wins the ♣️A.

East returns a low heart. You play a low heart. If West also plays low, you can win in dummy and take the established club winners. West, however, wins the ️️♥️A. West leads another heart and you have to win in your hand with the ♥️K as East discards a club.

You have three established club winners in dummy, but you don't have a sure entry to reach them. You can try leading a low diamond to dummy's ♦️Q. Unfortunately, East wins the ♦️K. You can't get to dummy that way. East leads the ♠️Q and you win the ♠️K.

You can hope to establish an extra diamond winner through length. You play the ♦️A and both defenders follow suit. So far, so good. When you lead another diamond, however, West shows out, discarding a club. East wins the trick. The defenders' diamonds have divided 4-2.

East takes a trick with the high diamond. East leads a spade and you win the ♠️A. The defenders have the last two tricks and the contract has gone down three.

It was unfortunate the defenders held up their ♣️A and you couldn't reach dummy with either a heart or a diamond.

Perhaps you should have played the ♥️K when East returned a heart. Let's see if that would have helped.

West leads the ♥️4. You play a low heart from dummy. East plays the ♥️8 and you win the ♥️10. You go about promoting the club winners you need by leading the ♣️Q, starting with the high card from the short side. Both defenders hold up winning their ♣️A. You lead your remaining club. When West follows with a low club, you are careful to overtake with dummy's ♣️10 so you will be able to continue the suit if the defenders hold up the ♣️A a second time. East, however, wins the ♣️A.

East returns a low heart. Suppose you play the ♥️K instead of a low heart. If West wins this trick with the ♥️A, you will now have an entry to dummy with the ♥️Q. West, however, plays a low heart, letting you win the ♥️K. West can see the danger of letting you create an entry to dummy.

Once again you are stuck in your hand with no entry to dummy's club winners. So playing a low heart when East returns a heart does no good and neither does playing the ♥️K.

Was there something you could have done differently earlier?

Let's go back to trick one once again.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥️4. You play a low heart from dummy, and East plays the ♥️8. You are immediately at the critical point in the play.

You will need an entry to dummy's club winners once they are established and, if the defenders hold up the ♣️A, the only likely entry is in hearts. If you win the first trick with the ♥️10, West can prevent you from reaching dummy with a heart. If you subsequently play the ♥️K, West can hold up the ♥️A, and if you play a low heart, West can win the ♥️A and you will have to win the third round of hearts with the ♥️K in your hand. How can you get around this?

Win this trick with the ♥️K!

Now, with two remaining low hearts in your hand, you will be able to create an entry to dummy. You want to immediately go after promoting the club winners you need. Since the suit is unevenly divided, you start with the ♣️Q, the high card from the short side. Both defenders follow with low clubs. You continue with the ♣️9. When West follows with a low club, you carefully overtake with the ♣️10. Both defenders again follow with low clubs. Because you overtook the club, you are now in the right hand to continue with a third round of clubs. This time, East wins the ♣️A. Dummy's remaining two clubs are now promoted into winners.

East returns a heart but, since you got rid of the ♥️K at trick one, West can't prevent you from reaching dummy. West chooses to win the ♥️A. West leads another heart. You can win this with dummy's ♥️Q and you have the entry to dummy you needed.

You can take both the established club winners. You still have two spade winners and a diamond winner to take. That gets you up to nine tricks. The defenders have the last two tricks, but you have made the contract. You took two spade tricks, two heart tricks, four club tricks, and one diamond trick.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ 84<br>♥️ QJ5<br>♦️ Q62<br>♣️ KJT84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ T63<br>♥️ A9742<br>♦️ T5<br>♣️ 752</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ QJ95<br>♥️ 83<br>♦️ KJ97<br>♣️ A63</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ AK72<br>♥️ KT6<br>♦️ A843<br>♣️ Q9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, you need to promote winners in both hearts and clubs. You want to start with the club suit since the opponents are trying to establish enough winners in the heart suit to defeat the contract.

Just as declarer can use the hold-up play to try and disrupt the defenders' communications, the defenders can use the hold-up play to disrupt declarer's communications.

When promoting winners in an unevenly divided suit, declarer wants to start with the high card from the short side first. In clubs, declarer starts with the ♣️Q and is careful to overtake the second round of clubs to be in dummy to continue the suit if the defenders hold up a second time.

Declarer also needs to try and keep an entry with the suit being established, clubs on this deal. The only sure side entry on this deal is the heart suit. Declarer has to be prepared at trick one to get the ♥️K out of the way and retain two low hearts. The low hearts can then be used to provide a link to one of the heart winners in the dummy.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240812)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240809)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240815)

### By Date

Use the links below.