---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-08'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240808'

next:
  text: '2024-08-10'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240810'
---

# 2024-08-09

On this deal, the opponents have given you a critical piece of information.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K4<br>♥ K73<br>♦ K96<br>♣ AQJ85</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. You have to decide what call to make with this hand.

The hand is balanced and you have 16 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card club suit. That puts it at the top of the range for a 15-17 1NT opening. 

West passes, and your partner, North, raises to 3NT. East passes, and you have to decide what to do next.

Partner's raise is a signoff bid. You have described your hand nicely with the 1NT opening bid. Partner has enough information to decide both How High and Where the contract belongs. You have nothing to say except pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠10, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ8<br>♥ 65<br>♦ AJ875<br>♣ T96</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K4<br>♥ K73<br>♦ K96<br>♣ AQJ85</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You have to find the best way to take at least nine tricks. The first step to planning the play in a notrump contract is to count the number of winners there are in the combined hands. How many sure tricks are there?

There are two sure spade winners, the ♠A and ♠K. There are no immediate heart winners. The defenders hold all the honors other than the ♥K. There is one sure club trick, the ♣A. There are two immediate diamond tricks, the ♦A and ♦K. That gives you only five sure tricks: two spades, a club, and two diamonds. You need to establish at least four more tricks to make the contract.

In spades, you might get an extra trick with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♠Q.

Similarly, in hearts, you might get an extra trick with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♥A.

In clubs, there is the possibility of four extra tricks with the help of one or more finesses if East holds the ♣K. Even if West holds the ♣K and the finesse loses, you will have established three extra tricks.

Finally, in diamonds, there is also the possibility of a finesse if West holds the ♦Q. Taking the finesse is better odds than playing the ♦A and ♦K, hoping the ♦Q will fall. Even if you lose a trick to the ♦Q, that will still establish three extra tricks if the defenders' diamonds divide 3-2.

So there are lots of ways to get the extra tricks you need. Is there any danger?

The only danger is if the defenders can establish enough winners to defeat the contract before you can develop and take the winners you need. There's no problem in clubs or diamonds, and you have at least two stoppers in the spade suit. The main danger is the heart suit. If West holds the ♥A and East gains the lead, East can lead a heart to trap the ♥K. That makes East the dangerous opponent. West is the safe opponent. If West gains the lead, West can't lead hearts without giving you a trick with the ♥K. So, if you have to lose a trick, you would prefer to lose it to West rather than East. That means it is safer to take the club finesse than the diamond finesse. If the club finesse loses to the ♣K, it will be to the safe opponent. If the diamond finesse loses to the ♦Q in the West hand, it will be to the dangerous opponent.

So the basic plan should be to start by trying the club finesse. If it works, you will have nine tricks. Even if it loses, you will be up to eight tricks. If West then leads a heart, you will have nine tricks. If West doesn't lead a heart, you still have a chance to get a ninth trick if the ♦Q is favorably located in the opponents' hands. Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠10. You are at a critical point in the play. What are you playing from dummy?

Since it looks as though dummy has only two sure entries, the ♠A and ♦A, let's see what will happen if you decide to win the first trick with the ♠A so you can immediately try the club finesse.

Suppose you play dummy's ♠A and East follows suit. You now lead the ♣10. East plays low, you follow with a low club, but West wins the trick with the ♣K. That's okay. West is the safe opponent. If West next leads a spade, club, or diamond, you can safely win the trick. If West leads a heart, it will guarantee a ninth trick for you.

West doesn't lead a heart and, instead, continues with the ♠3. You play dummy's ♠8, hoping the ♠Q will appear from East. East, however, plays the ♠2, and you're forced to win the ♠K. You can take your four club winners. What now?

You're up to six tricks: two spades and four clubs. Even with two more winners to take, the ♦A and ♦K, that's only eight tricks. You need one more. You cannot afford to let the opponents gain the lead. They can take their established spade winners and the ♥A to defeat the contract. So you have no choice but to try the diamond suit. Perhaps the ♦Q will fall singleton, or it is favorably located with West.

You play the ♦K, and both defenders follow with low diamonds. No ♦Q appears. You continue with a second diamond. West plays low. Following the guideline of "eight ever, nine never," it would appear you should finesse the ♦J, hoping West started with the ◆Q-4-2. 

Unfortunately, East wins the trick. You know what's about to happen next. Here are the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J<br>♥ 65<br>♦ A<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 9<br>♥ AQ2<br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q<br>♥ JT<br>♦ T<br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ K73<br>♦ 9<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

East takes a trick with the ♠Q. East leads the ♥J. It doesn't matter what you do. The opponents have three tricks to take. 3NT is down two. Could you have done better?

Let's go back to the beginning.

## Recommended Play

As you have seen, if you start by trying the club finesse and it loses to West's ♣K, you will have only eight tricks when East holds the ♦Q and West the ♥A. Is there a better way to get a ninth trick if the club finesse loses?

Yes. The spade suit.

The opponents have given you some considerable help in the suit. West has led the ♠10. First, this gives you a "free" finesse. You can try the ♠J at trick one. If East does have the ♠Q, you can win the ♠K. In effect, you can safely try the spade finesse without risking that East gains the lead. However, West's opening lead has given you another critical piece of information. What else do you know?

West also holds the ♠9! West is presumably leading the top of touching cards. That makes dummy's ♠8 an important card. With this knowledge, what are you playing from dummy at trick one?

The ♠J!

Covering the ♠10 with the ♠J accomplishes two things. First, if West holds the ♠Q, the ♠J will win and you'll have an extra trick without risking giving the lead to East. Second, it will promote the value of dummy's ♠8.

East produces the ♠Q. The spade finesse has lost but East still doesn't get the lead. You win the trick with the ♠K. You don't want to try the diamond finesse, since that would be right into the dangerous opponent. You want to start with the club finesse. If that works, you'll have nine tricks.

Since you aren't planning to take the diamond finesse, you can use the ♦A as an entry to dummy so you can try the club finesse. You could even play the ♦K first just in case the ♦Q falls singleton or doubleton, but let's keep things simple and just cross to the ♦A. Now you can try the club finesse.

Unfortunately, it loses to the ♣K in West's hand. The good news is your remaining clubs are now winners, so you are up to eight tricks. Also, the safe opponent is on lead. West leads a low spade. You have another critical decision to make. What are you playing to this trick?

The ♠8!

The ♠10, ♠J, ♠Q, and ♠K have already gone. They all went on the first trick. And you "know" who holds the ♠9.

As you fully expected, dummy's ♠8 wins the trick. You can now take the ♠A, the four established club winners, and the That's nine tricks. You've made the 3NT contract with four club tricks, two diamond tricks, and **three** spade tricks.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ8<br>♥ 65<br>♦ AJ875<br>♣ T96</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T9763<br>♥ AQ92<br>♦ 42<br>♣ K4</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q52<br>♥ JT84<br>♦ QT3<br>♣ 732</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K4<br>♥ K73<br>♦ K96<br>♣ AQJ85</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If you try the diamond finesse, it will lose to East's ♦Q. East can then switch to the ♥J, trapping the ♥K and giving the defenders enough tricks to defeat the contract. If you had to play the spade suit yourself, you would lose a spade finesse to East's ♠Q.

West's lead of the ♠10, however, gives you the clue you need to make
the contract. By covering the ♠J, you can eventually take a "sure" finesse of dummy's ♠8.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240809)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240808)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240810)

### By Date

Use the links below.