---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-20'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240820'

next: false
---

# 2024-08-21

Today's quiz is based on Audrey Grant Improving Your Judgment 1: Opening the Bidding - Obstructive Opening bids: Part 2.

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

You don't have to open with a preemptive bid just because you have a long suit. It's an option. The decision whether to open with a preemptive bid depends on:

- Location of high-cards

- Position at the table

- Vulnerability

- Partnership style

Here are a few tips to improve your judgment.

### Tip #1 - Offense and Defense

For an ideal preempt, the high cards should be concentrated in the long suit, not the side suits. The hand then provides good offense in terms of playing tricks if you are the declarer. The more high cards you have in other suits, the better your defensive values and the more tricks you can expect to take if the opponents play the hand. There is less likelihood the opponents can make anything.

Compare the hand

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ KJ9753<br>♥️ KT74<br>♦️ <br>♣️ K82</td>
	</tr>
</table>

with

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ AKJT84<br>♥️ 86<br>♦️ 52<br>♣️ 973</td>
	</tr>
</table>

The second hand, with the concentrated strength in spades, is perfect for a weak 2♠️ opening. The first hand has more high-card strength but is less than ideal for 2♠️. The partnership might belong in hearts, and there's defensive potential if the opponents come into the auction. Most players avoid opening a weak two-bid with a four-card major suit on the side or with a void.

### Tip #2 - Position at the Table

When you are in first or second position, partner has not had a chance to make a call. A preemptive opening should be sound since partner could have most of the missing strength.

In third position, you have more leeway. Partner has already passed, so you won't get in partner's way and the chance that the opponents have at least game has increased. This is the time to occasionally preempt with a poor suit or with one fewer cards than normal in your long suit.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ 7<br>♥️ J986543<br>♦️ K95<br>♣️ J8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

This hand wouldn't be a sound preempt in first or second seat with such a poor suit. In third, non-vulnerable, you might stretch a bit.

In fourth position, there's no need to preempt the opponents since you can pass. Only open with a preempt which you expect to make.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ AQJT874<br>♥️ 4<br>♦️ JT73<br>♣️ 3</td>
	</tr>
</table>

With this sound preempt, you could open 3♠️ in fourth position since you expect to make that contract if partner has a fair share of the missing strength. It will likely keep the opponents from entering the auction and partner will know not to get too high.

### Tip #3 - The Guideline of 1, 2, and 3

The Guideline of 500 only takes your side's vulnerability into account. A loss of 500 is a reasonable estimate of the value of the opponents' presumed game contract. A non-vulnerable game is worth about 400 points and a vulnerable game is worth about 600 points. A slight refinement is to consider the vulnerability of both sides when estimating the danger of overbidding.

#### 1. Unfavorable Vulnerability

When your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not, you don't want to be defeated more than **one** trick. That would be a penalty of 200 points if doubled. If you are defeated two tricks, the penalty would be 500 points which is more than the value of the opponents' non-vulnerable game.

#### 2. Equal Vulnerability

When both sides are not vulnerable or both sides are vulnerable, you don't want to be defeated more than **two** tricks. If you are defeated two tricks doubled with both sides not vulnerable, the penalty is 300 points, less that the value of the opponents' non-vulnerable game. If you are defeated two tricks doubled with both sides vulnerable, the penalty is 500 points, less than the value of the opponents' vulnerable game.

#### 3. Favorable vulnerability

When the opponents are vulnerable and your side is not, you can afford to be defeated up to **three** tricks if doubled. The penalty would be 500 points, which would be less than the value of the opponents' vulnerable game.

This guideline is referred to as the Guideline of One, Two, and Three and is a little more conservative than the Guideline of 500.

### Tip #4- The Guideline of Two, Three, and Four

In practice, preemptive opening bids are usually so effective, that most partnerships adopt an approach that is more aggressive than either the Guideline of One, Two, and Three or the Guideline of 500:

- Unfavorable Vulnerability - Bid for **two** tricks more than you
have.

- Equal Vulnerability - Bid for **three** tricks more than you have.

- Favorable Vulnerability - Bid for **four** tricks more than you have.

This approach assumes that partner will provide at least one trick on most hands. If partner doesn't provide that trick and the opponents double, the penalty will be greater than the value of their potential game contract. This is a small risk, however. Even when you have bid too much, the opponents don't always double and sometimes don't take all the tricks to which they are entitled.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ KQJT85<br>♥️ 4<br>♦️ 853<br>♣️ 942</td>
	</tr>
</table>

This hand has about five playing tricks and the Guideline of Two, Three, and Four would suggest opening 2♠️, which is also in line with the Guideline of 500. Suppose the vulnerability is favorable instead. The Guideline of Two, Three, and Four states that you can overbid by four more tricks than you have. That suggests opening 3♠️ with this hand, rather than 2♠️, even with a six-card suit. That might seem risky, but in today's game, the trend is toward taking a very aggressive approach to preemptive bidding. Some partnerships prefer an even more aggressive style.

Alternatively, you can ignore the vulnerability and all three guidelines and simply open at the two-level with a good six-Card suit and at the three level with a good seven-card suit.

## Questions

### 01

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ Q853<br>♥️ AQJ843<br>♦️ <br>♣️ 942</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Pass

Most partnerships avoid weak two-bids with four-card support for an outside major or with a void. Here you have both.

### 02

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ 74<br>♥️ K95<br>♦️ 82<br>♣️ AJT842</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Pass

You can't open a weak two-bid in clubs and the suit isn't long enough or strong enough for a three-level preempt in first or second position.

If you were in third position, you might try 3♣️.

### 03

You are South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ 83<br>♥️ AKJ973<br>♦️ QJ4<br>♣️ 74</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

1♥️ (2♥️)

You have enough to open at the one level, but in third position, you might choose a weak two-bid for tactical reasons.

### 04

You are South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ Q5<br>♥️ 6<br>♦️ KQT97632<br>♣️ 52</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

4♦️

A weak hand, a good eight-card suit, and partner has already passed. Time to put the maximum pressure on the opponents.

### 05

You are South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ AKJT7<br>♥️ K73<br>♦️ T74<br>♣️ 94</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

1♠️

This hand can be treated as a light opening bid in third position.

### 06

You are South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ 5<br>♥️ AKQ8753<br>♦️ T986<br>♣️ 9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

4♥️ (3♥️)

Now that partner is a passed hand, opening 4♥️ would be a reasonable shot. It might even make!

In first or second position, partner would expect you to hold an eight-card suit so you'd open 3♥️.

### 07

You are South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ KQJT8<br>♥️ 74<br>♦️ T3<br>♣️ 9742</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

2♠️ (Pass)

You are in third position, non-vulnerable, opposite a passed partner. Perhaps this is the time to treat that five-card suit as a six-card suit.

### 08

You are South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ 94<br>♥️ AKJ876<br>♦️ J93<br>♣️ 72</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Pass

A good weak two-bid, even vulnerable in any position except fourth. You have the opportunity to pass the hand out, so don't give the opponents a chance to get back into the auction.

### 09

You are South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ J8<br>♥️ T<br>♦️ K62<br>♣️ AJ97543</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Pass

In addition to the fact that you are in fourth position and can pass the hand out, it would be dangerous to open a preemptive bid with this hand when your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not in any position.

### 10

You are South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ AKQT97<br>♥️ 4<br>♦️ 64<br>♣️ AT73</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

2♠️ (1♠️)

This hand is strong enough to open 1♠️ but there's very little defense outside the spade suit. If you are ever going to open a weak two-bid in fourth position at unfavorable vulnerability, this is the time.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240821)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240818)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240821#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.