---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-02'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240902'

next:
  text: '2024-09-04'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240904'
---

# 2024-09-03

In today's deal, are you taking advantage of the help from partner?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 75<br>♥ JT973<br>♦ 8<br>♣ T9872</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens 1♥. East overcalls 1♠. You now get to make your first call.

With only 1 high-card point, it may seem you have nothing to say. With a weak hand but at least a ten-card heart fit, however, the modern style is to take some preemptive action after the opponent's overcall. Although you could jump to 3♥, the Law of Total Tricks suggests that it should be relatively safe to compete to the ten-trick level. So let's go with a preemptive jump raise to 4♥.

Your preemptive action doesn't prevent West from advancing to 4♠. Partner and East both pass, and the auction is back to you.

You've done enough with the 4♥ bid. You can hope you've either pushed them opponents too high or stopped them from getting to a slam. Your pass ends the auction, and you are on lead against East's 4♠ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

The general guideline is to lead partner 's suit... unless you clearly have something better to do.

On this deal, leading partner's suit is unlikely to accomplish much. With at least ten combined hearts, one of the opponents will have at most a singleton. If the opponents hold the ♥A, you aren't getting any heart tricks. If partner holds the ♥A, partner is unlikely to need you to lead the suit in order to get the one trick to which your side is entitled.

A lead that may be more effective is the singleton diamond. If partner holds the ♦A or can gain the lead before your trumps are drawn, you may be able to ruff one or more of declarer's diamond winners.

Let's see what will happen on this deal if you lead the ♦8.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♦8 and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT62<br>♥ K4<br>♦ JT942<br>♣ KQ</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 75<br>♥ JT973<br>♦ 8<br>♣ T9872</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays the ♦2 from dummy and partner wins the first trick with the ♦A as declarer follows with a low diamond. Success. Looks like you have found a good lead. Partner returns the ♦3. Looking at the diamond length in dummy, partner can be fairly certain you have led a singleton diamond since you chose not to lead a heart. Declarer plays the ♦Q, and you ruff with a low spade. You have managed to get a trick with your weak hand. You are now at the critical point in the defense. What are you playing to trick three?

You'd like to get back to partner's hand so you can get another diamond ruff with your remaining trump. Since partner opened the bidding 1♥, it looks as though you should lead back a heart. Let's see what will happen if you do.

Suppose you lead the ♥J. Declarer plays low from dummy, partner follows with a heart, and declarer wins the ♥A. That didn't work.

Declarer leads a spade to dummy's ♠K. You follow with your last trump and partner follows with the ♠Q. Looks like that's the end of the spade suit for your side.

Declarer now proceeds to take the rest of the tricks, making an overtrick. Your side only took one diamond and a diamond ruff.

That's too bad. It looked as though you got off to a great start. Could you have done something differently?

Let's go back and try again.

## Recommended Defense

You lead your singleton diamond, and partner wins the first trick with the ♦A as dummy and declarer follow with low diamonds. Partner returns the ♦3 and you ruff declarer's ♦Q. That's the first two tricks for your side. Now what?

You want to get back to partner's hand so you can get another diamond ruff. Since partner opened 1♥, it would seem reasonable to lead a heart, hoping partner has the ♥A.

But hold on! Partner has sent you a different message. With presumably a choice of diamonds to lead for you to ruff, partner chose the ♦3. That's the lowest outstanding diamond since dummy's ♦2 was played to the first trick. Why did partner choose the ♦3 rather than a higher diamond? Partner expected you to ruff this trick and knew you would then want to try to get back to partner's hand for a second ruff. Partner's ♦3 is a suit preference signal, showing a preference for the lower-ranking of the two obvious suits, hearts and clubs.

Partner wants you to lead a club!

Trusting partner, you lead a club at trick three. You are pleased to see partner with the ♣A. Partner leads another diamond, and you get to ruff another of declarer's diamond winners with your remaining trump.

You lead a heart, hoping for yet another trick, but declarer wins and has the rest of the tricks. That's okay. Your side got a diamond, a club, and **two** diamond ruffs.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q<br>♥ Q8652<br>♦ A73<br>♣ AJ53</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT62<br>♥ K4<br>♦ JT942<br>♣ KQ</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AJ9843<br>♥ A<br>♦ KQ65<br>♣ 64</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 75<br>♥ JT973<br>♦ 8<br>♣ T9872</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When you lead a short suit, looking for a ruff, it is up to partner to help out. If partner can't win the trick, partner will hopefully be able to give a suit preference signal showing where partner has a possible entry should you gain the lead. If partner does win the trick, the card returned should be a suit preference signal, suggesting which suit should be led next. This requires both partners to be on the same wavelength. You must trust partner to have made the correct signal. If the situation was reversed, you must give partner the appropriate signal.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240903)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240829)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240903#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.