---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-05'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240905'

next:
  text: '2024-09-07'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240907'
---

# 2024-09-06

On this deal, is there danger from an opponent?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ AKJT98<br>♦ AQ42<br>♣ J6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. You have to decide what call to make with this hand in first position.

You have 15 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit. That makes this hand a medium-strength opening bid at the one level and, with an unbalanced hand, you start with the six-card major suit.

West passes. Partner, North, responds 1♠. East now comes into the auction and overcalls 2♦. You have to decide what to do next.

With a singleton in partner's suit and a good holding in diamonds, one possibility is to make a penalty double. However, your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not, so any penalty you get might not be enough to compensate for what your side can make. You have an excellent hand for hearts and the ♦A-Q are favorably placed. So let's go with rebidding the heart suit. The hand is too strong to rebid 2♥, which would show only about 12-16 points. Instead, you have enough to make a highly invitational jump rebid to 3♥, showing about 17-18 points.

West passes, and partner raises to 4♥. East passes, and you have another chance to make a call.

You've already shown your values and have nothing more to say.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦5, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ985<br>♥ Q5<br>♦ 73<br>♣ T874</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ AKJT98<br>♦ AQ42<br>♣ J6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In planning the play in a suit contract, the first step is to consider the number of losers you have in 4♥. How many do you have?

You don't have any heart losers. It's solid. You also don't have any spade losers. Dummy's ♠A will take care of the singleton in your hand. There are, however, three potential diamond losers. Since West has led a diamond, you will be left with only two losers no matter what East plays to the first trick. There are two club losers. That makes a total of four losers: two diamonds and two clubs. One more than you can afford.

You can't do anything about the club losers. You don't have enough entries to dummy to consider establishing an extra spade winner.

In diamonds, however, you can plan to ruff at least one diamond loser in dummy, and perhaps both.

So you might make an overtrick if you can ruff both diamond losers.

Is there any danger?

What clues do you have from the auction and the opening lead?

The defenders' diamonds are divided 6-1!

East overcalled diamonds during the auction, showing five or more diamonds. You have six diamonds in the combined hands, so West could have only one or two. West has led the ♦5, and you can see all the lower-ranking diamonds. So West must be leading a singleton, not top of a doubleton.

If West ruffs the second round of diamonds, you will still be okay if you can ruff both your remaining diamonds in dummy, but let's see the danger on the actual deal.

## Possible Play

West leads the ♦5. East plays the ♦K, and you win the first trick with the ♦A. You can't afford to draw the defenders' trumps if you are planning to ruff the diamond losers in dummy. So let's suppose you lead the ♦Q at trick two. As you expected from the auction and opening lead, West ruffs this trick. You'll still be okay, however, if you can ruff both your remaining diamond losers in dummy.

West, however, can anticipate what you are planning to do and leads a heart. That removes one of dummy's trumps.

You can safely ruff one of your remaining diamonds in dummy. Unfortunately, after drawing the defenders' trumps, you will still be left with a diamond loser and two club losers. Having already lost one trick, 4♥ is going down.

Did you have an alternative to trying to ruff at least one of your diamond losers in dummy?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the singleton diamond, and you win the first trick. Since you "know" from the auction and opening lead that West has led a singleton diamond, do you have any option for making the contract other than trying to ruff one of your diamond losers in dummy?

No!

If you don't ruff one of the diamond losers in dummy, you will be left with four losers. However, you need to ruff only one diamond loser in dummy, not both. How can you accomplish that without getting the ♦Q ruffed?

You can lead a low diamond at trick two!

You can afford to lose one diamond trick, just not two.

It won't help West to ruff this trick. West would just be ruffing East's winner. So West discards and East wins the trick. East can lead a heart, but it's too late for the defense. You win the trick.

Now you carefully lead your remaining diamond loser and ruff it with dummy's remaining trump. You've eliminated one of the diamond losers. You need to get back to your hand safely and draw the remaining trumps. You can't afford to give up a club since East can win and lead a diamond, letting West ruff your ♦Q. Instead, you take a trick with the ♠A. You ruff a spade to get back to your hand. Since you are ruffing with a high heart, you can't be overruffed.

Now you can draw the remaining trumps. East shows out on this trick. So West started with four trumps and still has two left. That's okay. You draw another of West's trumps. West still has one left. You draw West's last trump. Finally, it's safe to take a trick with the ♦Q.

Your last trump is your tenth trick. You've made the 4♥ contract, losing only two clubs and **one** diamond.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ985<br>♥ Q5<br>♦ 73<br>♣ T874</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K632<br>♥ 7432<br>♦ 5<br>♣ Q932</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QT4<br>♥ 6<br>♦ KJT986<br>♣ AK5</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ AKJT98<br>♦ AQ42<br>♣ J6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Your initial detective work tells you that West is going to ruff the ♦Q if you lead it at trick two. However, you can give up one diamond trick. You don't need to ruff both diamond losers to make the contract. So it becomes a matter of when you give up a diamond trick. It is safer to lose a diamond trick early than to plan to lose a diamond trick later.

It might also help to think in terms of winners. After the opening diamond lead, you have nine winners: a spade, six hearts, and two diamonds. You need just one more. To get a tenth trick, you need to ruff only one of your diamond losers in dummy with a high trump.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240906)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240905)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240907)

### By Date

Use the links below.