---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-14'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240814'

next:
  text: '2024-08-16'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240816'
---

# 2024-08-15

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ AQJT8<br>♥️ 9643<br>♦️ AQ<br>♣️ AQ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

You have 19 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. Although the hand is semi-balanced, some might open 2NT. However, with 5-4 in the majors, it's usually better to open the five-card major. Let's go with opening 1♠️.

West passes, and partner, North, raises to 2♠️. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

With a maximum one-level opening bid, you can take the partnership right to game now that you've found an eight-card or longer major-suit fit.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠️ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♠️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠️3, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ K72<br>♥️ A<br>♦️ 843<br>♣️ 865432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ AQJT8<br>♥️ 9643<br>♦️ AQ<br>♣️ AQ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In making a plan in a suit contract, you start by counting the potential losers. You don't have any spade losers. You have the top five spades and there are only five spades outstanding. After dummy's ♥️A is gone, you will be left with three heart losers. There is a potential club loser since the ♣️K is missing. There is also a potential diamond loser since the ♦️K is missing. So there are five potential losers: three hearts, a diamond, and a club. You need to eliminate two of the losers.

In hearts, you could hope to ruff all three of your losers in dummy. However, West has led a spade, removing one of dummy's trumps. Now, you can only ruff at most two hearts in dummy.

You might avoid the club loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♣️K. That's a 50% chance.

Similarly, you might avoid the diamond loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ️️♦️K. That's another 50% chance.

So you can avoid some of the losers by taking either the club or diamond finesse, or both, and ruffing heart losers in dummy. Is there anything that could go wrong?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠️3. You play a low spade from dummy, East plays a low spade, and you win the ♠️8 in your hand. What next?

You want to ruff a couple of hearts in dummy, so you first need to get the ♥️A out of the way. You cross to dummy's ♥️A as both defenders follow suit. You are now at the critical point in the play. What next?

It seems as though this is a good opportunity to try one of the two finesses you can take. Let's see what might happen if you start with the club finesse.

You lead a low club from dummy, East plays low, and you try the ♣️Q. Unfortunately, West wins with the ♣️K. So much for that chance.

West leads another spade. You win in your hand as East shows out, discarding a diamond. West has started with four spades.

It's nasty of West to keep leading trumps. However, you can still ruff one of the heart losers in dummy. Since you still have two heart losers in your hand and have already lost a club trick, you need to try the diamond finesse. You lead a diamond from dummy and, when East follows with a low diamond, you try the ♦️Q. This isn't your day. West wins the ♦️K. Both your finesses lost. That happens only 25% of the time.

West returns a diamond, and you win the ♦️A.

You can draw the remaining trumps, but you are eventually going to have to lose two heart tricks. Down one.

You were very unlucky on this deal. Both your finesses lost and West unkindly led trumps to prevent you from ruffing more than one heart loser. Is there anything you could have done about this unfavorable lie of the cards and West's good defense?

Let's go back to the beginning.

## Recommended Play

West leads a spade and dummy comes down. Sometimes in a trump contract, it is easier to think about winners rather than losers. How many winners do you have?

You have five spade winners in your hand, and you have the ♥️A, ♣️A, and ♦️A. That's eight tricks. Two heart ruffs in dummy will bring the total to ten! No need for any finesses.

You win the first trick in your hand. You get dummy's ♥️A out of the way so you will be able to ruff your heart losers. You lead a club from dummy. East plays a low club and... you win the ♣️A. You don't need to risk the finesse. Now that you are back in your hand, you can ruff one of the heart losers in dummy. You lead a diamond from dummy. East plays a low diamond and... you win the ♦️A. You don't need to risk the finesse. You ruff another heart loser in dummy.

You have won the first six tricks and you still have four spade winners in your hand. You have to lose a heart, a club, and a diamond, but that's all. You have your ten tricks and your 4♠️ contract.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ K72<br>♥️ A<br>♦️ 843<br>♣️ 865432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ 9643<br>♥️ Q852<br>♦️ KT6<br>♣️ K9</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ 5<br>♥️ KJT7<br>♦️ J9752<br>♣️ JT7</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ AQJT8<br>♥️ 9643<br>♦️ AQ<br>♣️ AQ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Finesses often seem to offer an irresistible attraction. You feel as though they are there to be taken. If they work, you gain a trick. If they lose, you've lost a trick you had to lose anyway.

However, safely making the contract takes priority and you must always be aware of the possible danger if a finesse loses.

On this deal, it gives West an opportunity to lead another trump.

Counting your winners instead of your losers is sometimes the easier approach.

On this deal, with ten tricks to take, you just need to take them.

Playing matchpoints, there may be something to be said for trying the finesses but, in a team game, take the money and run.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240815)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240812)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240816)

### By Date

Use the links below.