---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-23'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240923'

next: false
---

# 2024-09-24

In today's deal, which suit will give your side the best chance to establish the tricks you need?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J963<br>♥ Q9532<br>♦ Q2<br>♣ 74</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 1NT, showing a balanced hand of about 15-17 points. You have to decide what call to make with this hand.

You have only 5 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. There's no reason to do anything except pass.

West responds 2♣, the Stayman convention. Your partner, North, passes. East replies 2♠, showing a four-card or longer spade suit. The auction is back to you.

Again, you have no reason to do anything except pass.

West jumps to game, 3NT. Partner and East both pass. You have one more opportunity to make a call.

Naturally, you pass once more, ending the auction. You now have to choose an opening lead against East's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

The standard lead against a notrump contract is fourth best from your longest and strongest suit. That would mean leading the ♥3. Let's see how that would work out on this deal.

You lead the ♥3, and West puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K7<br>♥ KJT6<br>♦ AT4<br>♣ JT83</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J963<br>♥ Q9532<br>♦ Q2<br>♣ 74</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

West has 12 high-card points. Declarer has 15-17, and you have 5. That leaves about 6-8 points for partner.

Declarer plays the ♥J from dummy, which wins the first trick as partner and declarer follow with low hearts. That doesn't look like a good start. Declarer continues with a low heart to the ♥A. You and partner both follow with low hearts. Doesn't look as though you are getting any tricks from the heart suit.

Declarer now plays a low club to dummy's ♣J, and partner wins the ♣A. That's at least half of partner's high-card points. Things aren't looking good.

In fact, declarer claims the contract with an overtrick at this point.

Could you have done something different that would impact the outcome?

Let's go back and take another look.

## Recommended Defense

You are on lead against East's 3NT contract. Although the general guideline is fourth from longest and strongest, it's not automatic. You should consider the auction and the information it provides. For example, if partner has bid a suit during the auction, you would usually lead that suit.

Here, partner hasn't bid anything, but you have some valuable clues from the opponents' bidding.

First, when West used the Stayman convention, East showed a four-card or longer spade suit. That makes it unattractive to lead a spade from your meager four-card suit.

What about hearts?

By inference, the auction has told you West has four hearts!

If West was not interested in finding a heart fit, West would simply have raised 1NT to 3NT. The fact that West used the Stayman convention implies West was interested in finding an eight-card major-suit fit. Since West wasn't interested in playing in spades when East showed four, West must have been interested in hearts.

It's not always wrong to lead a suit shown by the opponents but, in this case, West has four hearts and East presumably has two or three hearts for the 1NT opening. So your partner has only one or two hearts, and your suit isn't strong enough to establish even if partner happens to have the ♥A or ♥K - which is against the odds. In addition, even if you could establish a trick or two in hearts, you don't have a likely entry to your hand to take any winners.

It's unusual to lead a doubleton against a notrump contract when your partner hasn't bid the suit. However, with spades and hearts both being unattractive, you are left with diamonds and clubs. By leading one of your short suits, you can hope to find partner with some length in that suit. Also, since partner likely has a better hand than you do, partner may well have the entries needed to establish and take winners in the suit.

Leading an unsupported honor from a doubleton in an unbid suit is usually a bad idea. So why lead a diamond rather than a club?

A club looks less likely to potentially give up a trick. However, there are two good reasons for leading a diamond.

First, you have some help in diamonds. You don't need partner to have as much strength in the suit as you would in clubs.

Second, if your partner did have a good holding in clubs, partner had the opportunity to make a lead - directing double when West made the artificial bid of 2♣. In the meantime, partner never had an opportunity to show some values in diamonds.

Having put all this together, let's see what will happen if you choose a diamond as your opening lead.

With a doubleton, you would start with the ♦Q, top of the doubleton. Since you are hoping partner has length and strength in diamonds, you are following declarer's usual practice of leading the high card from the short side first.

You lead the ♦Q and West puts down the dummy. West has the ♦A and ♦10, so that's a little disappointing. However, you can see that leading a heart or a spade is unlikely to have been a success, and dummy does have more clubs than diamonds.

Declarer wins the first trick with dummy's ♦A. Partner plays the ♦8 as declarer follows with a low diamond. Partner's ♦8 looks like an encouraging attitude signal, so perhaps you got off to a good start. Of course, partner may be expecting you to have a better diamond holding, including the ♦J. Declarer leads a low club from dummy, and partner immediately hops up with the ♣A. At least, partner does have an entry.

Partner takes a trick with the ♦K as everyone follows with low diamonds. Perhaps partner is still expecting you to hold a diamond suit headed by the ♦J. Good news! Partner continues with the ♦J, winning the trick as declarer and dummy follow suit and you discard a heart. Partner was holding the ♦J and knew you were making an usual lead from a short suit. Better news. Partner plays another diamond and declarer shows out. You did find partner with both length and strength in diamonds. Partner has another diamond to play. That's the fifth trick for the defense.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but you have defeated the contract. You didn't take a single trick, but partner took a cub and **four** diamond tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 852<br>♥ 74<br>♦ KJ875<br>♣ A52</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K7<br>♥ KJT6<br>♦ AT4<br>♣ JT83</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AQT4<br>♥ A8<br>♦ 963<br>♣ KQ96</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J963<br>♥ Q9532<br>♦ Q2<br>♣ 74</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Were you lucky to find partner with the perfect holding in diamonds?

Certainly. But your opening lead was well-reasoned. Hopefully, partner congratulates you at the end of the play.

Leading an unsupported honor from a doubleton is usually ill-advised. Nonetheless, there are always exceptions.

Here, the auction gives you an indication that it may be your best chance for defeating the contract. And so it proves.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240924)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240917)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240924#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.