---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-25'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240825'

next: false
---

# 2024-08-26

In today's column, where are you going to find the game-going trick?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ765<br>♥ 873<br>♦ AT<br>♣ 86</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. North and South are vulnerable, and East and West are not. As dealer there is a chance to choose an opening call.

You have 11 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit. That's enough to open the bidding at the one level. With an unbalanced hand - two doubletons - you open in the six-card major suit.

West passes. North responds 2♣. East passes, and you have to select a rebid.

Partner's response in a new suit at the two level is forcing, and game-forcing if the partnership is playing two-over-one game forcing. You can show the extra length in the spade suit by rebidding 2♠.

West passes. North raises to 4♠, and East passes. The auction is back to you.

Partner has decided the partnership belongs in game in spades. With nothing extra for the opening bid, you have no reason to do anything except pass.

West passes. The auction has ended and you are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥10. Partner puts down dummy with three-card spade support, and 12 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton diamond.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K32<br>♥ AJ4<br>♦ 95<br>♣ AT752</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ765<br>♥ 873<br>♦ AT<br>♣ 86</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Making 4♠ will require ten tricks. In a suit contract, begin by counting potential losers. There are no spade loser since you hold the top four honors. Even if the missing spades divide 4-0, you will be able to draw all the defenders' trumps. There will be two heart losers remaining after the ♥A is driven out. There will be a club loser remaining after dummy's ♣A is gone. There will also be a diamond loser remaining once the ♦A is gone. There are four potential losers, two hearts, one club, and one diamond. One of the losers must be eliminated to make the contract.

A second heart loser might be avoided if, for example, West holds both the ♥K and ♥Q. That's very unlikely when West has chosen to lead the ♥10.

There is also no way to avoid the club or diamond losers within the suits themselves. The only hope is to establish an extra winner in dummy on which to discard one of the losers.

Dummy's club suit provides the opportunity for establishing an extra winner through length. If the defenders' six clubs divide 3-3, two extra club winners can be established through length after giving up one trick to the opponents. If the defenders' clubs divide 4-2, one extra winner can be established after giving up a trick to the opponents. Declarer can ruff the third round nd of clubs - and the fourth round if necessary - to avoid losing more than one club trick to the opponents.

In Considering the Order, however, there is a potential problem. Once dummy's ♥A is driven out, there will be only two entries left in dummy, the ♣A and ♠K. Will that be enough to both establish a club winner and then reach it?

Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥10. Suppose you try the ♥J from dummy just in case West holds both the ♥K and ♥Q. As expected, however, East wins the trick with the ♥K. East returns a heart and that drives out dummy's ♥A. You can't afford to hold up a second time since the defenders might switch to a diamond and establish a winner there.

Suppose you decide to start by drawing trumps. You want to keep dummy's ♠K as an entry, so you start by playing a low spade to the ♠J. Both defenders follow with low spades. So far, so good. You continue with the ♠Q. West follows, but East shows out, discarding a diamond. The defenders' spades have divided 3-1 and West still has a spade remaining.

You can't afford to draw the last trump since you need the ♠K as an entry to the clubs once they are established. Since you have to lose a club trick, you want to take the losses early, retaining the ♣A as an entry to help establish the clubs. You play a low club and, when West follows with a low club, you play a low club from dummy, giving up a trick to East.

East leads a heart and West wins the ♥Q. That was the second heart trick you had to lose after West's opening lead. Since you've also lost a club trick, you can't afford any more losers. West, rather than switching to a diamond, makes the annoying play of another spade. This removes dummy's ♠K before you are ready to use it.

You can take a trick with the ♣A. Both defenders follow suit for a second time. You lead another club from dummy and ruff it with a low spade. Good news! Both defenders follow suit for a third time. The defenders' clubs have divided 3-3 and dummy's remaining two clubs have both been established as winners. Unfortunately, there is also bad news! You no longer have an entry to dummy's club winners.

You can take your two remaining spade winners. You can also take a trick with the ♦A, but you have to lose the last diamond trick to the opponents. Even though the clubs divided favorably, 3-3, the 3-1 division in the trump suit meant the contract had to go down one.

Or did it?

Let's go back and try again.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥10. There isn't much point in holding up the ♥A. If East started with a doubleton heart honor, winning the ♥A might make it difficult for the defenders to take their heart winners.

Suppose you win the ♥A at trick one as East follows with a low heart. With the ♥A gone from dummy, the only remaining entries to dummy are the ♣A and ♠K. That won't be enough to establish a club winner if the missing clubs are divided 4-2. The only hope for the contract is for the missing clubs to divide 3-3. That's against the odds, but it's the only chance. Since you have to lose a club trick anyway, you might as well take your loss right away. You want to preserve dummy's ♣A as an entry later. You lead a low club from dummy and West wins with the ♣J.

West takes a trick with the ♥Q. West leads another heart and East wins the ♥K. That's the two heart tricks you were expecting to lose. East shifts to a low diamond. Since you have already lost three tricks, you can't afford to lose any more. You win the ♦A.

You might as well find out if the clubs are breaking favorably. You lead a club to dummy's carefully-preserved ♣A. Both defenders follow with low clubs. So far, so good. You lead another club and, when East follows with the ♣Q, you ruff with a high spade. No point in being overruffed and going down an extra trick if the clubs are breaking 4-2. West, however, follows with the ♣K. Good news. The clubs have divided 3-3 and dummy's remaining two clubs are both winners.

There's no need to rely on the defenders' spades dividing 2-2. With the clubs breaking, you can afford to handle a 3-1 spade break. You take a trick with the ♠A and both defenders follow with low spades. Good. The defenders' spades have divided no worse than 3-1 and the contract is now secure. You draw another round of trump with the ♠Q. West follows, but East shows, discarding a diamond. The spades have divided 3-1, but you are in control. You play a spade to dummy's ♠K. This draws West's last trump and provides an entry to dummy at the same time. You can now take one of dummy's established club winners and discard the diamond loser.

You win the last two tricks with the remaining trumps and have made the contract. You lost two hearts and one club trick, but that was all. With the fortunate 3-3 club break, you were able to establish the extra winner you needed.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K32<br>♥ AJ4<br>♦ 95<br>♣ AT752</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T84<br>♥ QT9<br>♦ KJ64<br>♣ KJ4</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 9<br>♥ K652<br>♦ Q8732<br>♣ Q93</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ765<br>♥ 873<br>♦ AT<br>♣ 86</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Once the defenders drive out dummy's ♥A, you need some good fortune to make the contract. With the lack of entries to dummy, you can't afford the missing clubs to divide 4-2. You would not have enough entries to ruff clubs twice and return to dummy for the established winner.

Although you need the clubs to divide 3-3, you don't need the spades to divide 2-2. You can't afford to draw two rounds of trumps before going after the clubs since the opponents may then remove your spade entry before you are ready to use it. Instead, you need to take the loss in clubs early. When the clubs divide 3-3, you can now draw the trumps ending in dummy to reach the club winner you need.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240826)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240824)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240826#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.