---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-25'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240925'

next: false
---

# 2024-09-26

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A63<br>♥ AT965<br>♦ A73<br>♣ KQ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

There are 17 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. Although the hand is balanced, it's too strong for 1NT when the partnership range is 15-17 points. Instead, you can open the five-card major, 1♥.

West passes, and partner, North, raises to 2♥. East passes. You have to decide what call to make after this start.

Partner's raise to the two level shows three-card or longer support and about 6-9 or 10 points. With a medium-strength hand, you have enough to invite game. There is unlikely to be enough combined strength if partner has only 6 or 7 points, but there should be enough if partner has 8 or more. Some partnerships still play 3♥ as a straightforward invitation to game. A popular modern style, however, is to play 3♥ as preemptive in this auction. The modern style is to make a help suit game try in this auction.

With a balanced hand, you don't really need help in any particular suit, so the most descriptive game try is 2NT. It's even possible that the partnership belongs in 3NT if partner has a balanced hand and only three-card support. So let's go with 2NT.

West passes, and partner jumps to 4♥. East passes, and the auction is back to you again.

Partner has accepted your invitation, so you have nothing more to say. You pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦Q, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q2<br>♥ QJ74<br>♦ K96<br>♣ 8754</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A63<br>♥ AT965<br>♦ A73<br>♣ KQ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 8 high-card points and four hearts, enough to accept the game try.

You start by considering the potential losers. There is one potential trump loser since you are missing the ♥K. There will be two potential spade losers once the ♠A is gone. You'll be left with a potential diamond loser after the ♦A and ♦K are gone. You have a sure club loser since the opponents have the ♣A. So, that's five potential losers: a heart, two spades, a diamond, and a club. You must eliminate two of them.

You can avoid the heart loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♥K. That's a 50% chance.

You can also avoid one of the spade losers with the help of a finesse by leading toward dummy's ♠Q, hoping West holds the ♠K. That's another 50% chance. Even if the finesse loses, you will be able to ruff your third spade in the dummy.

You can't do anything about the club loser, and you can't do anything about the diamond loser in the suit itself. However, if West holds the ♠K, you can establish an extra spade winner on which to discard one of dummy's diamonds. You could then ruff your third diamond in dummy.

Since you can always eliminate one of the spade losers by ruffing in dummy, the contract hinges on avoiding either the heart loser or the diamond loser. You'd like to give yourself two chances rather than one, but does it matter in which order you try your chances?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦Q. You have a critical decision right away. Where are you winning this trick?

If you are planning to start with the heart finesse, you can win this trick in dummy. Let's see how that works on this deal. 

Suppose you win the first trick with dummy's ♦K. You lead dummy's ♥Q. East follows with a low heart and you try the finesse by playing a low heart from your hand. Unfortunately, this loses to West's ♥K. So much for your first chance.

West continues with another diamond, and you win this with the ♦A. You draw a second round of trumps. Both defenders follow suit, and that takes care of all the outstanding trumps.

You try the spade finesse by leading toward dummy's ♠Q. West hops up with the ♠K, so you play low from dummy. The finesse has worked, and you have now established dummy's ♠Q as a winner.

However, before you can make use of the extra spade winner, West takes a trick with the ♦10. That's the defenders' third trick.

West leads a spade, and you win dummy's ♠Q. Sadly, you still have to lose a trick to the ♣A. 4♥ is down one.

The heart finesse didn't work but the spade finesse did. However, even though one of the two finesses worked, you still went down. Could you have done something else?

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♦Q, and you have to decide where to win this trick.

As you have seen, if you start by trying the heart finesse and it loses, there is no second chance. You can try the spade finesse. However, even if it works, you will finish with four losers. So let's see what will happen if we change the order and try the spade finesse first.

To try the spade finesse, you want to be in your hand. You play low from dummy and win the first trick with the ♦A. Now you try the spade finesse by leading toward dummy's ♠Q. West rises with the ♠K. The spade finesse has worked, and you've turned dummy's ♠Q into a winner.

West continues with another diamond, and you have no choice but to win dummy's ♦K. Should you try the heart finesse now?

No!

If you try the heart finesse and it loses, the defenders will take their established diamond winner and you'll finish with four losers. Since the spade finesse has worked, you no longer need the heart finesse to work. The priority is to eliminate the diamond loser before the defenders can regain the lead.

You take a trick with dummy's ♠Q. Next, you need to get back to your hand. How can you do that?

The only entry to your hand without giving up the lead is the ♥A. You can't afford to try the heart finesse, but that's okay. You don't need it.

You play a heart to the ♥A, and both defenders follow with low hearts. What now?

Time to make use of the extra spade winner you created with the help of the spade finesse. You play the ♠A and discard dummy's remaining diamond. The defenders can no longer take a diamond trick upon gaining the lead.

You lead a heart, giving up a trick to the defenders' ♥K. Unable to take a diamond trick, West leads a club and East wins the ♣A. That's the last trick for the defense.

You can ruff your remaining diamond loser in dummy. You've made the 4♥ contract, losing a heart, a spade, and a club, but **no** diamonds.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q2<br>♥ QJ74<br>♦ K96<br>♣ 8754</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ85<br>♥ K2<br>♦ QJT2<br>♣ 962</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T974<br>♥ 83<br>♦ 854<br>♣ AJT3</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A63<br>♥ AT965<br>♦ A73<br>♣ KQ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You want to give yourself two chances to make the contract rather than one. That improves your odds from 50% to 75%. However, the order in which you take the finesses is important.

Since you will have to lose a trick to the ♠K if the spade finesse works, you should take it first. If you take the heart finesse first and it doesn't work, then it is too late to take the spade finesse. By then, the defenders will have established their diamond winner and will be able to take it after winning the ♠K.

What if East has the ♠K and the spade finesse loses?

Then you won't be able to get rid of your diamond loser, but you can still fall back on the heart finesse. So you get both your chances.

If possible, always try to give yourself two chances in the play. This may mean taking a long hard look at the deal before playing too quickly to the first trick... a common error among declarers.

On this deal, the order in which you plan the play is all important.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240926)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240923)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240926#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.