---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-09'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240909'

next:
  text: '2024-09-11'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240911'
---

# 2024-09-10

In today's deal, can you take advantage of partner's opening lead?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 975<br>♥ A72<br>♦ Q5<br>♣ AT862</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. With neither side vulnerable, West is the dealer and opens 1NT, showing 15-17 points and a balanced hand. Your partner, North, passes, and East responds 2♣, the Stayman convention, asking for a four-card major. You must decide what to do after this start.

When the opponents make an artificial bid, you have the option of making a lead-directing double, suggesting that partner lead the suit.

In this situation, however, you should have a better suit to request partner to lead a club. You have some help in hearts and diamonds, so you don't want to dissuade partner from leading one of those suits. You pass.

West rebids 2♠. Partner passes again, and responder jumps to 3NT. The auction is back to you.

You have no reason to do anything except pass.

West and partner both pass, ending the auction. Partner is now on lead against West's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♣7, and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J63<br>♥ QJ93<br>♦ AT74<br>♣ Q9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 975<br>♥ A72<br>♦ Q5<br>♣ AT862</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The ♣Q is played from dummy. You are immediately faced with a critical decision. What are you playing to this trick?

You are a little surprised that partner has led your best suit but, before playing to the first trick, you should consider a few questions. What do you know about the strength of partner's hand? Why did partner choose to lead a club? What is the likely layout of the club suit?

To decide on partner's likely strength, you consider the strength of the other three hands. Declarer presumably has about 16 points for the 1NT opening. Dummy has 10 high-card points and so do you. That's a total of 36 points, leaving only about 4 points for partner.

Against a notrump contract, with nothing else to go on, partner typically leads fourth best from the longest and strongest suit. Is the ♣7 partner's fourth best club?

To determine whether the ♣7 is partner's fourth highest club, you can apply the Rule of Eleven. Subtracting partner's card from eleven, that would leave four cards higher than the ♣7 in the other three hands, 11 - 7 = 4. Dummy has two cards higher than the ♣7, and you have three. Since there are five cards higher than the ♣7 already in view, partner's lead cannot be fourth best. So it appears that the ♣7 is likely a top of nothing lead. As the ♣5, ♣4, and ♣3 are outstanding, that is entirely possible.

Could partner be leading low from a three-card club suit, the ♣K-J-7?

That's possible, but very unlikely. Leading a low club from ♣K-J-7 would be both unusual and risky. It appears declarer has both the ♣K and ♣J.

Why would partner be leading the top of nothing from a three-card or four-card suit rather than something else?

First, partner may have length in West's spade suit and East's implied heart suit - since East used Stayman and didn't like spades. Partner may not want to lead either of those suits. Second, you have already determined that partner doesn't have much strength. So partner, knowing you hold the balance of the defensive strength, is hoping to find your best suit. Whatever the reason, it appears to have worked! Partner has found your best suit and you have some high cards as potential entries to help establish the suit and be able to take the winners.

Having done all this analysis, you are back to the question of what to play to the first trick. Since the ♣Q has been played from dummy, the natural instinct is to play third hand high, or cover and honor with an honor. Let's see what will happen if you play the ♣A.

Your ♣A wins the first trick as declarer follows with the ♣5. What next?

You want to continue with partner's good work by knocking out declarer's two remaining club stoppers to establish your remaining clubs as winners. So you return the ♣6, your original fourth best club. Declarer wins with the ♣J as partner follows with the ♣4. That's consistent with partner's lead being the top of nothing. 

Declarer now leads the ♥K. Partner follows with the ♥5 and dummy with the ♥3. Should you win the ♥A?

Your clubs have not yet been established, so there's no hurry to take the ♥A. Let's suppose you hold up winning this trick.

West continues with another heart to dummy's ♥9. Should you win this trick?

You could win and drive out declarer's ♣K, but then you would be left with no sure entry to your hand once the clubs are established. The ♦Q is not likely to be an entry. So let's assume you hold up again.

Declarer now changes to a new suit, leading the ♠J from dummy. You follow low, as does declarer, and partner wins the ♠K.

Partner leads another club, driving out declarer's last stopper, the ♣K. That's good. Your remaining two clubs are now winners and you still have the ♥A as an entry.

However, declarer now takes two diamond winners and three spade tricks. Declarer has nine tricks before you can regain the lead and take your established winners.

Is there anything you could have done?

Let's return to the first trick.

## Recommended Defense

Partner has led the ♣7 and dummy's ♣Q is played. Based on your analysis of partner's opening lead, you can tell that declarer has the ♣K and ♣J. Your side will need to gain the lead twice more to both establish and then take the club winners. You are going to need to preserve the ♣A as entry to the clubs when they are established.

You can't stop declarer from winning two club tricks. However, you can control which round of the suit to win. It would be best to win the third round of clubs, when the suit will be established.

So you let dummy's ♣Q win the first trick. However, you make an encouraging attitude signal by playing the ♣10, the highest card you can afford. This is the start of a high-low signal, telling partner that you would like clubs continued.

Declarer follows the same plan as before, starting on the hearts. A low heart is lead from dummy. As partner may have the ♥K, you play second hand low. Declarer wins in hand with the ♥K. Declarer leads a second round of hearts to dummy's ♥9. Since partner doesn't hold the▼K, you need to use up one of your entries by winning the ♥A. What should you do next? Play the ♣A?

No!

You know declarer still has the ♣K and ♣J remaining, so you need to hold on to the ♣A as an entry. You lead the ♣6, and declarer wins the ♣J as partner follows with the ♣4.

Declarer crosses to dummy with a heart. Dummy's last heart is led. You discard a low spade. Declarer now tries the spade finesse, leading the刘from dummy. You play low, declarer plays low, and the finesse loses to partner's ♠K.

Partner still has a club left to lead, and you finally get to win the ♣A as declarer's ♣K falls. Now you can take the two low clubs that have been established through length.

You have defeated the 3NT contract with one heart, one spade, and **three** club tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K84<br>♥ 865<br>♦ J963<br>♣ 743</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQT2<br>♥ KT4<br>♦ K82<br>♣ KJ5</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J63<br>♥ QJ93<br>♦ AT74<br>♣ Q9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 975<br>♥ A72<br>♦ Q5<br>♣ AT862</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Notrump contracts are often a race to see which side can establish their tricks first. But that's not all. Whether on offense or defense, it is critical to ensure that the hand with the established long sure winners has an entry to take those winners. If the only entry is in the long suit itself, you will need to keep a winner in the suit, in this case, the ♣A.

On this deal, if you win the first trick with the ♣A, it won't make any difference when you win the ♥A as you will no longer have an entry to the clubs when they are established.

If, however, you do find the correct play of holding up the ♣A on the first trick, it would be a mistake to hold up winning the ♥A twice. Having won two heart tricks, declarer can switch to spades and establish three spade tricks to go with the two heart tricks, two club tricks, and two diamond trick... winning the race to nine tricks before you can get five.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240910)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240903)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240910#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.