---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-06'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240906'

next: false
---

# 2024-09-07

On this deal, did you bid too much?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T75432<br>♥ <br>♦ AQJ<br>♣ AKJ8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

This is an actual deal from the 2000 World Championships held in the Netherlands. Both sides were vulnerable. Larry Cohen was sitting South, playing with David Berkowitz. Berkowitz, North, was the dealer and passed. East also passed, and Cohen had to decide what to open in third position.

With 15 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit, Cohen had a sound one-level opening bid in the six-card major.

Then the auction took off. West made a preemptive jump overcall to 3♥. Berkowitz then made a jump raise to 4♠. East got into the action with 5♥. Cohen had to decide what to do after all this bidding.

As Larry said when writing up this deal in his book My Favorite 52: "With the vulnerable opponents bidding up to 5♥, partner probably doesn't have much wastage in hearts. For the jump to game opposite my third seat opening, which could be light, partner must have some decent values and, presumably, some spade cards. What about a control-showing bid of 6♥ to try for a grand slam? Nah. That would be too pushy opposite a passed hand. Partner would need the ♠A-K and then some. I bid 6♠. There is no 100% correct answer, but I believe this to be the most practical call."

Everybody passed, and Cohen was the declarer in 6♠ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>5♥</td>
		<td>6♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

Before we see what happened in the actual play, let's suppose you are declarer. How do you plan to handle the slam contract?

West leads the ♥K, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ6<br>♥ T<br>♦ T83<br>♣ T9542</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T75432<br>♥ <br>♦ AQJ<br>♣ AKJ8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has good spades but not much else.

Start by considering the potential losers in 6♠. You are missing three spades, including the ♠Q. Unless East holds all three spades, you won't have a spade loser. There are no heart losers since you can ruff the first round. There's a potential club loser since you are missing the ♣Q. There's also a potential diamond loser since you are missing the ♦K. So, assuming the spades behave, you have two potential losers, a club and a diamond. You can afford one loser but not two.

In clubs, you won't have a loser if the defenders' four clubs are divided 2-2 or there is a singleton ♣Q. If East has three or more clubs including the ♣Q, you could take a finesse. Without anything else to go on, the guideline eight ever, nine never suggests playing the ♣A-K with nine combined clubs. 

In diamonds, you can avoid the loser with the help of a repeated finesse if East holds the ♦K. That's a straight 50% chance.

So the slam prospects look pretty good. You might even make an overtrick if the ♣Q falls and East holds the ♦K. Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥K. You play dummy's singleton ♥10. East plays the ♥9, and you ruff with a low spade. There's no need to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. You play a spade to dummy's ♠K, and both defenders follow suit. That's good. The defenders' spades haven't divided 3-0. The ♠A drops East's ♠Q. That takes care of the trumps. What next?

It seems you should find out how the clubs are behaving and whether you need the diamond finesse. You play a club to the ♣K. Both defenders follow suit, but no ♣Q appears. If West had shown out, you would have a sure thing. You could take a finesse against East's "known" ♣Q. Following the eight ever, nine never guideline, you continue with the ♣A. This time, the guideline lets you down, unfortunately. West shows out. The defenders' clubs have divided 3-1. So now you have to lose a club trick to East's ♣Q. You still have the chance of the diamond finesse.

East leads a diamond, and you have no choice but to try the diamond finesse. You can discard one of your diamonds on dummy's fifth club, but not both. West, however, wins with the ♦K.

You have the rest of the tricks, but the 6♠ slam is down one.

Perhaps you should have been more cautious in the biding... or a little luckier.

So what was Larry Cohen's result on this deal in the World Championship?

## The Actual Play

When Larry Cohen played the contract, the play started exactly the same way. West led the ♥K, and Cohen ruffed the first trick. He then drew the defenders' trumps. That took two rounds. Next, he played a club to the ♣K. He knew that if he first took the diamond finesse and it lost, he would have to depend on guessing what to do in clubs. When both defenders followed on the first round of clubs, however, he had a sure way of making the contract.

He couldn't afford to lose both a club trick and a diamond trick. There was no sure way to avoid a club loser unless he could see through the backs of the cards as to whether West started with a singleton club or the doubleton ♣Q. But there was a way to avoid a diamond loser if he had to lose a club trick.

He crossed to dummy by playing the ♠7 to dummy's ♠J. That made sure the ♠6 would be a later entry if he needed one. He played another club from dummy. When East followed with a low club, he made a play that guaranteed the contract.

He played the ♣J!

This assured the contract whether the finesse won or lost!

On the actual deal, the finesse won as West showed out. The contract was then secure and Cohen could try for an overtrick. He took the ♠A. East's ♠Q fell on this trick. He crossed to one of dummy's club winners. He discarded a diamond on dummy's remaining club winner. He tried the diamond finesse for an overtrick.

It lost to West's ♦K, but that was okay. He had the rest of the tricks, making the 6♠ contract. He only lost a diamond trick.

But was he just lucky, guessing that East held the ♣Q?

Let's see what would have happened if West held the 2Q. 

## What If?

Suppose this had been the layout when Cohen was about to take the club finesse.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ <br>♦ T83<br>♣ T954</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ QJ4<br>♦ K654<br>♣ Q</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ A8765<br>♦ 97<br>♣ 7</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T5<br>♥ <br>♦ AQJ<br>♣ AJ8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Here, West held the ♣Q. When a club was led from dummy and declarer finessed the ♣J, in this layout, the trick would lose to West's ♣Q.

That's okay. With West on lead, West had no spades or clubs remaining. If West led a heart, it would give declarer a ruff and a sluff, allowing declarer to ruff in dummy and discard the ♦J. If West led a diamond, it would be no better. Declarer could then win the trick with the ♦J.

Next, declarer would take the ♣A... cross over to one of dummy's club winners. On the last club winner, discard the ♦Q in declarer's hand.

Declarer had the rest of the tricks, again making the slam contract. Declarer lost a club trick but **no** diamond trick.

Notice that it wouldn't have mattered if East had shown out of clubs on the second round of clubs. Declarer would win the ♣A and put West on lead with the ♣Q to get the same result.

## The Rest of the Story

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ6<br>♥ T<br>♦ T83<br>♣ T9542</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 9<br>♥ KQJ432<br>♦ K6542<br>♣ 3</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q8<br>♥ A98765<br>♦ 97<br>♣ Q76</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T75432<br>♥ <br>♦ AQJ<br>♣ AKJ8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Taking the club finesse on the second round of clubs was a "heads I win, tails I win" play. If the finesse worked, declarer wouldn't have a club loser. If the finesse lost, West would be endplayed, and declarer wouldn't have a diamond loser.

Larry Cohen and David Berkowitz had one of the unluckiest results in the World Open Pairs in the Netherlands. They led throughout the five-session final, only to be overtaken on the final two deals. In addition to winning the Silver Medal in the Pairs, they would later win the Bronze Medal in the World Team Olympiad. Not a bad set of results!

Larry Cohen was born in New York in 1959 and initially worked as a computer programmer and an options trader. He now works full-time in the bridge world. He lectures regularly on land and at sea and has written many best-selling books and hundreds of articles on the game.

Larry learned to play bridge from his grandparents when he was 6. By age 17, he was a Life Master, and at age 22, he won the first of more than 25 National Championships. In addition to winning all the major North American Championships at least once, he twice won the Cavendish Invitational Pairs. He also won the 1999 Cap Gemini World Top 16 Pairs Tournament. In 2002, he was named Player of the Year, and in 2011, the Honorary Member of the Year. In 2020, Larry was elected to the ACBL Hall of Fame.

Away from the table, he likes to spend time on the golf course.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240907)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240906)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240907#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.