---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-24'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240824'

next:
  text: '2024-08-26'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240826'
---

# 2024-08-25

Today's column discusses when to make a takeout double of right-hand opponent's opening bid.

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

A takeout double of a one-level opening bid traditionally shows shortness in the opened suit and roughly the values to open the bidding. It asks partner to bid one of the unbid suits. Because the takeout doubler plans on becoming dummy, doubler counts high-card points plus dummy points - 1 for a doubleton in the opponent's suit, 3 for a singleton, and 5 for a void.

Ideally, a takeout double shows 13 points or more and four-card support for every unbid suit. Like most bids, however, there is some flexibility. If you had to wait for the ideal hand, the takeout double would rarely come up. Let's take a look at some example hands.

You hold this hand as South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A973<br>♥ QJ42<br>♦ 6<br>♣ KJ43</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and opens the bidding 1♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This is an ideal takeout double: four-card support for all three unbid suits and a singleton in opener's suit. South has 11 high-card points, plus 3 dummy points for the singleton diamond. This is close to the minimum for a takeout double, but it is clear to make a takeout double with this hand.

Here's another hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ4<br>♥ J3<br>♦ AQ52<br>♣ Q983</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and opens the bidding 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

There are 13 high-card points, but the distribution is wrong for a takeout double. South does not have shortness in opener's suit. A more fatal flaw is the doubleton heart. Although some flexibility is acceptable, doubler is expected to have at least three-card support for any unbid major. South should clearly pass over 1♠.

Consider this South hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A765<br>♥ KQ8<br>♦ Q32<br>♣ K73</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Again, East deals and opens the bidding, this time with 1♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has at least three cards in all three unbid suits - spades,
hearts, and diamonds - and 14 high-card points. The problem is South has three clubs, and a takeout double usually shows shortness in opener's suit. It is not mandatory to double on this sort of hand, but the modern trend is to try to get in the auction with any excuse. Many players will double with the right values and support for the unbid suits, even without shortness in opener's suit. Whether to adopt this style of doubling is a partnership decision. It is perfectly reasonable to pass 10 with this hand. Just make sure partner is on the same page as you.

Here is a similar, but slightly weaker, hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 732<br>♥ KQ43<br>♦ K98<br>♣ K63</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East opens the bidding 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Even for partnerships who don't wait for shortness to make takeout doubles, South still must have the requisite values to double. This hand, with 11 high-card points, is a bit light on strength to double. Combined with the imperfect distribution, this a clear pass.

The choice over an opponent's opening bid will not always be whether to double or pass. Sometimes the decision will be between doubling and overcalling.

Consider this South hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ4<br>♥ KJT42<br>♦ 8<br>♣ K832</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and opens the bidding 1♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has an appropriate distribution for a double of 1♦: shortness in diamonds and at least three cards in all the unbid suits. However, South also has five good hearts, and the first priority in the auction is finding an eight-card major-suit fit. A 1♥ overcall has a better chance to achieve that goal than a takeout double, because North won't know to bid a three-card heart suit if South doubles 1♦. Additionally, after a 1♥ overcall, North may be able to bid spades with five of them and a spade fit won't be missed.

Contrast this South hand with the previous one.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 5<br>♥ Q982<br>♦ KT754<br>♣ AK3</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and opens the bidding 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Here, the question is whether to make a takeout double or overcall in a minor. Similar to the reasons South overcalled in a major rather than make a takeout double, it looks best to double here. Making a takeout double brings hearts into the picture immediately, while a 2♦ overcall emphasizes diamonds. Plus, the diamonds are weak. It will usually work out better to make a takeout double with the appropriate distribution rather than overcalling in a five-card minor suit.

Consider this hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT5<br>♥ T<br>♦ QJ2<br>♣ AQT963</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and opens the bidding 1♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This time, South has a **six**-card minor, along with three cards in the other two unbid suits and shortness in hearts. Should that change the double or overcall decision?

Yes. While it makes sense to double rather than overcall a five-card minor, a six-card suit is usually the primary feature of a hand. Only if the long suit is weak would South consider doubling rather than overcalling a six-card suit. With this hand, South's clubs are strong, so this is an easy 2♣ overcall. 

A tougher decision may be whether to overcall a five-card major when holding four cards in the other major or whether to make a takeout double.

Take this South hand, for example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT94<br>♥ KQ632<br>♦ 6<br>♣ K83</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and opens the bidding 1♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has four spades and five hearts, as well as three-card support
for clubs. If South had especially strong hearts, a 1♥ overcall would stand out. With four strong spades and five weak hearts, a takeout double would probably be the better call. With a hand like this - decent holdings in both majors - the answer comes down to personal style. Some players like to overcall; others prefer to double. Partnerships should agree on a style that works for them.

Some hands simply fall through the cracks in standard bidding methods, with no good solution. This South hand illustrates one problematic hand-type.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A832<br>♥ K4<br>♦ KT753<br>♣ K4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and opens the bidding 1♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has three bad options:

- Pass with 13 high-card points, plus 1 point for the five-card diamond suit.
- Overcall a weak five-card diamond suit at the two-level.
- Double without three cards in all the unbid suits.

This is another question of personal style. Some pairs would feel comfortable doubling with this hand. If double is not acceptable in your partnership, then you can choose between pass and 2♦. Any of the three calls could work out well or poorly on a particular deal.

Here is one last hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K7<br>♥ KQJ982<br>♦ AK4<br>♣ J3</td>
	</tr>
</table>

As before, East is the dealer and opens the bidding, this time with 1♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With 17 high-card points, plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit, 19 points is too strong for a 1♥ overcall, which typically has a range of about 7-17 points. However, a takeout double can be used to show strong hands even without the appropriate takeout-double distribution. With this hand, South doubles 1♦, planning on bidding hearts next. This sequence of bids shows long hearts and a hand too strong to simply overcall 1♥.

# Summary

Like many other areas of bridge, the modern style of takeout doubles has drifted toward looser distributional requirements. There are no right or wrong answers about whether to conform to modern or traditional requirements for takeout doubles. It is simply a question of partnership comfort and preference.

## Questions

### 01

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 8<br>♥ KQ63<br>♦ JT82<br>♣ AJ95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Double

This hand is a perfect minimum takeout double of 1♠. South has
11 high-card points, plus 3 dummy points for the singleton spade. With four-card support for all three unbid suits, South will be happy whichever suit North bids.

### 02

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, and North-South are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT82<br>♥ 9<br>♦ KT4<br>♣ AQ943</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Double

South has a borderline hand for a 2♣ overcall, with enough strength to open the bidding and a decent five-card suit. However, with appropriate distribution for a takeout double, it is usually preferable to double rather than overcall a five-card minor.

### 03

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q97<br>♥ KJT3<br>♦ 863<br>♣ AKJ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Double (Pass)

South does not have the traditional takeout-double distribution. However, with 14 high-card points and at least three cards in all three unbid suits, the modern style would be to make a takeout double. This is a question of style - passing and awaiting to see how the auction develops is also acceptable.

### 04

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ86<br>♥ KT732<br>♦ A64<br>♣ 5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

1♥ (Double)

This is another question of style. South has support for all three unbid suits but also a five-card major. If the hearts were particularly strong South would do best to overcall, and if they were very weak, it might be better to double. With decent but not great hearts, both calls are reasonable.

### 05

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, and North-South are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 63<br>♥ Q872<br>♦ AK2<br>♣ QJ95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Pass

With 12 high-card points, South cannot double in standard methods without at least three cards in any unbid major suit. The only time South can consider doubling without support for an unbid major is with a very strong hand, about 18 points or more. There is no suit South can overcall, so it is clear to pass over 1♦.

### 06

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 5<br>♥ A63<br>♦ KQT842<br>♣ K94</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

2♦

South has support for all three unbid suits, but with a six-card minor, it would be highly unusual to double rather than overcall. On this deal, South's diamonds are strong, so there is no need to look beyond overcalling the six-card suit.

### 07

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ852<br>♥ AQ4<br>♦ J874<br>♣ J</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

1♠

Even with support for all the unbid suits, South should favor overcalling a five-card major rather than making a takeout double. It is possible to make an exception and double with four cards in the other major, but with only three hearts, overcalling 1♠ looks like a better choice.

### 08

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT73<br>♥ A98<br>♦ Q73<br>♣ K52</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Pass

Depending on your partnership style, it may be acceptable to make a takeout double with 4-3-3-3 distribution, but even so, South still needs enough strength to make a takeout double. The recommended minimum for a takeout double is about 13 dummy points. South is a bit too light to double on this hand, with 11 high-card points and 0 dummy points.

### 09

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJT83<br>♥ A7<br>♦ AQ3<br>♣ 83</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Double

South has 17 high-card points, plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit. 19 points is too strong for a simple overcall, so South starts with a double, planning on bidding spades later. This is an exception to the guideline not to double without three cards in any unbid major.

### 10

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K4<br>♥ QJ92<br>♦ A2<br>♣ K8632</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Double (Pass, 2♣)

South has three unpalatable options. South can pass and risk being shut out of the auction. South can double with only two diamonds and risk playing in a poor contract if North bids diamonds. Or South can overcall 2♣ on a weak five-card suit. Any of those calls could work out well or badly on any given day.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240825)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240821)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240825#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.