---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-24'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240924'

next:
  text: '2024-09-26'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240926'
---

# 2024-09-25

Today's quiz is based on Audrey Grant Improving Your Judgment 2: Doubles - Advancing Takeout Doubles - Part 1.

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

### Advancing Takeout Doubles

When an opponent has opened the bidding, and your partner doubles for takeout, experts suggest your side can reasonably look for game with less than the usual 25 or 26 points. Most of the opponent's high cards will be in the hand of your left-hand opponent, the opener, and this will help you on play. Let's take a closer look at advancing a takeout double to clarify how you and your partner can bid competitively to the best spot.

There are two decisions for advancer to make after partner makes a takeout double.

1. Pick a suit (or notrump)
   
2. Bid to the appropriate level
   
   - 0-8 points: Bid at the cheapest level

   - 9-11 points: Make an invitational bid

   - 12+ points: Get the partnership to game

Let's first focus on the actions to take if your right-hand opponent passes.

### After Responder Passes

Here, you are South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T7642<br>♥ T85<br>♦ 963<br>♣ 84</td>
	</tr>
</table>

West is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♦. Partner, North, doubles for takeout, and East passes. What would you do with this hand?

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Since responder didn't bid, you must say something. Partner's double shows interest in playing in any of the three unbid suits. It is not a penalty double of West's 1♦. Even though you have no high cards and can count only 1 point for the five-card spade suit, bid the longest suit at the cheapest level, 1♠, showing 0-8 points. Partner has promised three-card or longer support for any suit you choose so you can be confident of at least an eight-card fit.

Here's another example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T6<br>♥ JT73<br>♦ 852<br>♣ AQ62</td>
	</tr>
</table>

What is your choice this time?

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

1♥. Although the clubs are stronger than the hearts it's better to show the higher-ranking suit. You can bid hearts at the one level whereas the clubs would have to be bid at the two level. Besides major suit contracts are worth more than minor suit contracts and partner is more likely to have four-card support for unbid majors than an unbid minor.

Suppose you hold this hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q4<br>♥ 963<br>♦ T82<br>♣ QJ864</td>
	</tr>
</table>

What do you bid?

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Bid 2♣, the longest suit at the cheapest level. This still shows 0-8 points because it is the cheapest level available to bid clubs. You don't need extra values advancing a takeout double to the two level as you would responding to an opening bid. Since partner is showing support for the unbid suits - spades, hearts, and clubs - the situation is more comparable to raising partner's suit than introducing a new suit on your own.

What if you have extra?

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K4<br>♥ J92<br>♦ 73<br>♣ AQT864</td>
	</tr>
</table>

What would you do with this hand?

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With 10 high-card points and a six-card suit, make an invitational bid by jumping a level. Bid 3♣, rather than 2♣, to show 9-11 points. You should be safe at the three level since partner is showing an opening bid with support for the suit you choose. If partner has extra strength, a game contract is possible.

What if you have even more?

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A7<br>♥ QJ9642<br>♦ Q6<br>♣ QT4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

What action do you take with this hand?

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With 11 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit, you have enough to be in game opposite partner's takeout double. Even if partner has only three-card support for hearts, 4♥ should be an excellent contract.

### Advancing in Notrump

The doubler has described a hand that is short in the suit bid by your opponent. Playing in one of the unbid suits is the priority, even when advancer has some strength in the opponent's suit. Your high cards in the suit are poorly placed when the opening bidder is on your left. On the other hand, if you have a reasonable amount of strength after both opener and your partner have shown values, it's likely that your right-hand opponent has a very weak hand. It will probably be difficult for your right hand opponent to gain the lead to trap honors you hold. Now bidding notrump becomes a more viable option.

With good cards in the opponent's suit and no better option, bid notrump using the following ranges:

- 6-10 points: Bid notrump at the cheapest level
- 11-12 points: Bid notrump, jumping a level
- 13+ points: Bid game in notrump

Some experts use slightly higher ranges when advancing in notrump opposite partner's assumed shortness in the opponent's suit.

Here's an example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 972<br>♥ Q86<br>♦ AJ98<br>♣ QT4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

What do you do with this hand?

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You should have some length and strength in left-hand opponent's suit before considering notrump. Partner has made a takeout double and is unlikely to have many diamonds. However, this hand has no four-card suit to bid, and has most of the strength in the opponent's suit, so bid 1NT.

Here's another hand with the same auction. Again, you must make a choice.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ74<br>♥ 63<br>♦ KJ86<br>♣ J93</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Although you have strength and length in the opponent's suit, diamonds, bidding the major suit takes priority over bidding notrump. With 11 high-card points, the partnership is close to the strength needed for a game contract. A jump to 2♠ sends that invitational message.

### Advancer's Cuebid

At times, advancer with an invitational or game-going hand, needs more information from doubler before deciding the best contract. Bidding or jumping in one of the unbid suits is not forcing and may not land in the best spot so advancer needs a forcing call. There's a bid readily available for that purpose - a bid of the opponent's suit at the cheapest level. This is called advancer's cuebid.

After partner's takeout double, you can't want to play in the opponent's suit. With length or strength in their suit you would bid notrump or pass partner's takeout double and defend. So, a cuebid of the opponent's suit is simply an artificial forcing bid, asking for additional information from partner to help reach the best contract.

Consider this hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT94<br>♥ AJ64<br>♦ A7<br>♣ T83</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You want to be in game after partner's takeout double, but it's unclear whether 4♥ or 4♠ is better. A cuebid of 2♦ says nothing about diamonds. It asks for more information from partner who may have doubled with three cards in one of the major suits. You should be better placed to decide the best contract after hearing partner's next bid. If not, a bid of a new suit or notrump by advancer below the game level is still forcing.

Let's reduce the strength of the hand a little.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT94<br>♥ QJ64<br>♦ A7<br>♣ T83</td>
	</tr>
</table>

How does this affect the action you choose?

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With 10 high-card points, you are strong enough to want to make an invitational jump bid but it's unclear whether to jump in hearts or spades. Instead, you start with a cuebid of 2♦. This shows at least invitational values. If doubler bids 2♥ or 2♠, you will show your invitational strength by raising the suit bid to the three level.

## Questions

### 01

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T863<br>♥ 73<br>♦ 9842<br>♣ 952</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1♠**

Partner asked you to pick one of the unbid suits. You have to bid something, even with no points. At least you can bid spades at the one level.

### 02

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 64<br>♥ Q85<br>♦ QT732<br>♣ J93</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♦**

You don't have much but your best suit is diamonds so bid it at the cheapest level.

### 03

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ854<br>♥ 83<br>♦ AT2<br>♣ J43</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♠**

With 9 high-card points plus a five-card suit, you have enough to make an invitational bid by jumping a level. This is not forcing. Partner can pass with a minimum takeout double.

### 04

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T8632<br>♥ A4<br>♦ AK76<br>♣ Q4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**4♠**

Don't be concerned with the quality of the spade suit. Partner has promised support so spades will be adequate even if partner only has three-card support. With 13 high-card points and a five-card suit you have enough to want to be in game opposite partner's promised opening bid.

### 05

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 84<br>♥ JT5<br>♦ KQT9<br>♣ J642</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1NT**

You don't usually bid notrump in response to partner's takeout double but with this hand your strong holding in the opponent's suit suggests that notrump will be a better contract than your alternative choice, 2♣.

### 06

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 9863<br>♥ 74<br>♦ QT53<br>♣ Q65</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1♠**

Although you have some strength in diamonds, you don't have enough to suggest playing in notrump. Besides, bidding notrump would tend to deny a four-card major suit.

### 07

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 65<br>♥ K94<br>♦ 732<br>♣ AQJ84</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3♣**

With 10 high-card points and a five-card club suit, you have enough to make an invitational bid. Jumping in your suit gets you to the three level, but that should be fine opposite partner's opening bid and support for the unbid suits.

### 08

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K75<br>♥ K42<br>♦ QJ87<br>♣ K54</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2NT**

You don't have a four-card or longer suit to bid and your diamonds aren't long enough or strong enough to pass. With 12 high-card points and some strength in West's suit, diamonds, the best choice is 2NT, inviting partner to go to game with a little extra.

### 09

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT52<br>♥ AK82<br>♦ 952<br>♣ Q4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♦**

With 11 high-card points, you have enough to make an invitational jump. Instead of guessing which major to bid, start with a cuebid of 2♦. This is forcing, asking for further information from partner. You plan to raise partner's suit to show your invitational values.

### 10

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ63<br>♥ KJT8<br>♦ 863<br>♣ A2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♦**

With 13 high-card points opposite partner's takeout double you want to be in game. Rather than guess, get more information from partner by cuebidding 2♦. This is forcing, asking partner to bid a suit.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240925)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240922)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240929)

### By Date

Use the links below.