---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-19'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240819'

next:
  text: '2024-08-21'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240821'
---

# 2024-08-20

In today's deal, is the partnership on the same path to defeating the contract?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K73<br>♥ K653<br>♦ KQT<br>♣ 987</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. West is the dealer and passes. Your partner, North, also passes, and East opens 1♥. You have to decide what call to make with this hand.

You have only 11 high-card points and a balanced hand. With no five-card or longer suit, the hand isn't suitable for an overcall. With your longest suit being the one opened by your opponent, the hand also isn't suitable for a takeout double. Let's assume you pass.

West responds 1NT. Partner passes and so does East. The auction is back to you.

You are in the balancing position and, with the opponents stopping in partscore, you would like to compete if possible. However, your hand isn't ideal for making a balancing double with only three-card support for whatever suit partner bids. Also, partner has passed twice and your side is vulnerable. It seems best to simply pass and defend.

Your pass ends the auction. Partner will be making the opening lead against West's 1NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♠2, and East puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 954<br>♥ AJT87<br>♦ AJ8<br>♣ K5</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K73<br>♥ K653<br>♦ KQT<br>♣ 987</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays the ♠4 from dummy and you have to decide what to
play to this trick.

The guideline in this situation is third hand high, doing your best to win the trick for the partnership. There's no reason to go against the advice on this deal. You play the ♠K, and it wins the trick as declarer follows with the ♠8. Your side seems to be off to a good start. You are at the critical point in the defense. What should you do next?

The basic guideline in this situation is to return partner's suit. You want to work with partner to develop the tricks to which your side is entitled. Let's see what will happen if you lead back a spade.

You lead back the ♠7, top of your remaining doubleton. Declarer plays the ♠10, and partner wins the trick with the ♠J. That looks good for your side. Partner takes a trick with the ♠A as everyone follows suit and declarer's ♠Q falls. That's the third trick for your side. Partner continues with the last spade. Declarer discards a diamond from dummy, and you have to decide what to discard on this trick.

You don't want to discard the ♦10 since that's a potential trick if partner next leads a diamond. You could discard a low club, but the ♣7 might be considered by partner to be an encouraging attitude signal. So let's assume you discard a low heart.

Declarer discards a low club. Your side has taken the first four tricks, and that looks like a great start. Partner now switches to the ♣Q. A low club is played from dummy, you play a low club, and declarer wins the trick with the ♣A.

Next, declarer leads the ♥Q. Partner plays a low heart, and declarer plays a low heart from dummy, taking a finesse.

You could hold up winning the ♥K, but declarer will simply continue with another heart. So let's assume you win the ♥K.

Your side has won five of the first six tricks. But what now?

Whatever you lead, declarer will win in dummy and take the heart winners and finish with seven tricks: four hearts, two clubs, and a diamond. You'll get the last diamond trick, but that's all.

It would have been nice if partner could have led a diamond rather than a club after winning the last spade. But how could you tell partner to do that?

If you discarded an encouraging-looking ♦10, partner would likely have switched to a diamond, but you'd still only get one diamond trick.

Let's go back and see what you might have done.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♠2, and you win the first trick with the ♠K. Before automatically returning partner's suit, you need to make a plan.

Partner's spade lead looks to be a good choice, but partner has led the ♠2, presumably fourth best from a four-card suit. So your side is only going to get at most four spade tricks. You need to find three more.

You can see that you're likely to get a trick with the ♥K unless declarer doesn't need more than one heart trick to make the contract. Looking at dummy, you can also see that you are entitled to two diamond tricks if you can persuade partner to lead a diamond, trapping dummy's ♦J. But how can you tell partner to lead a diamond after taking the spade winners?

You can't afford to discard the ♦10 as an encouraging attitude signal. That's throwing away one of the tricks you need! So, as you've seen, if you return a spade at this point, partner may not know to lead a diamond after taking any spade winners. How can you send the appropriate message?

You can lead the ♦K, or ♦Q, right now!

If declarer wins with dummy's ♦A, your remaining ♦Q-10 will be poised to take two tricks when partner gains the lead. And you will be able to put partner on lead by playing a spade after winning a trick with the ♥K.

Suppose declarer refuses to win this trick with the ♦A. What now?

You can lead back a spade!

Partner captures declarer's ♠10 with the ♠J. Partner takes a trick with the ♠A, dropping declarer's ♠Q. Partner takes a trick with the last spade, and you can discard a low heart. From your earlier play in diamonds, partner knows to lead a diamond since you must hold the ♦Q and, presumably, the ♦10 as well.

Declarer can do no better than win the ♦A. Declarer leads a club and wins a trick with the ♣A. Declarer now leads the ♥Q and tries a finesse, hoping your partner holds the ♥K. 

However, you win the trick. You take a trick with the established ♦Q. That's the seventh trick for the defense.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but the 1NT contract is down one. Your side got four spade tricks, a heart trick, and **two** diamond tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ62<br>♥ 42<br>♦ 643<br>♣ QJ63</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT8<br>♥ Q9<br>♦ 9752<br>♣ AT42</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 954<br>♥ AJT87<br>♦ AJ8<br>♣ K5</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K73<br>♥ K653<br>♦ KQT<br>♣ 987</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As a defender, you always want to keep your eye on the target... defeating the contract when possible. You need to make a plan and try to get on the same track with your partner.

On this deal, you can see where the partnership's potential tricks are coming from, but you need to let partner in on the plan. The play of leading the ♦K or ♦Q right into dummy's ♦A-J early in the play sends a clear message that you have the suit under control. You would not be leading the suit if you thought it might help declarer. Now the partnership is on the same path to defeating the contract.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240820)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240817)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240827)

### By Date

Use the links below.