---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-11'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240911'

next:
  text: '2024-09-13'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240913'
---

# 2024-09-12

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ JT2<br>♥ K732<br>♦ AQJ8<br>♣ Q9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

There are 13 high-card points and the hand is balanced with no five-card major suit. You open at the one level in the longer minor, diamonds.

West passes, and partner, North, responds 1♠. East now comes into the auction with a 2♥ overcall. You have to choose what to after this start.

Although you might raise to 2♠ with three-card support, your spades aren't that good and the doubleton ♣Q is of dubious value. The best way to let partner know you have a minimum balanced hand is to simply pass.

If the partnership uses support doubles, you could double to show three-card support. A raise would show four-card support when you have this agreement.

Let's go with pass. West also passes, and partner now jumps all the way to 6♦. East passes. You have to decide what to do after this development.

Partner must have a very good hand, but you don't have anything extra for the opening bid. You pass.

West passes, and you are now the declarer in 6♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>6♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥5, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AK93<br>♥ 9<br>♦ KT962<br>♣ AJT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ JT2<br>♥ K732<br>♦ AQJ8<br>♣ Q9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner does have a nice hand with five-card support for diamonds, good black suit cards, and a singleton heart. Still, you have some work to do.

The first thing to do is consider the potential losers. The diamond suit is solid. No losers there. There's a potential spade loser since the ♠Q is missing. You start with four potential heart losers. However, West has led a heart, so you are going to get a trick with the ♥K. That reduces the potential heart losers to three. Finally, there's a potential club loser since you are missing the ♣K. So, there are five potential losers: a spade, three hearts, and a club. You can afford only one.

With only seven spades in the combined hands, the best play to avoid a loser is to take a finesse, hoping West has the missing ♠Q. That follows the guideline eight ever, nine never. With eight, or fewer, combined cards, try the finesse; with nine or more, play the ace-king. If the spade finesse works, you can repeat the finesse to create an extra spade winner on which to discard the club loser.

There's no problem holding the heart losers to one. After losing the first heart trick, you can ruff any heart losers in dummy.

There is also the possibility of avoiding the club loser with the help of a finesse, hoping West holds the ♣K. That's a 50% chance. If the club finesse works, you can repeat it and discard the spade loser on dummy's extra club winner.

So, after losing the first heart trick, it appears you will have to choose between taking the spade finesse or the club finesse. If the spade finesse works, you won't need the club finesse; if the club finesse works, you won't need the spade finesse. Of course, if you try one finesse and it loses, it will be too late to go back and try the other finesse. You'll already be down one. Which finesse are you planning to take?

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥5, the suit East overcalled. The singleton heart is played from dummy. East wins the first trick with the ♥A as you follow with a low heart. East returns the ♥Q. You have your first decision to make. What are you playing to this trick?

Since you can always ruff the heart losers later, it might seem reasonable to win this trick with the ♥K. Let's see what will happen if you do.

Suppose you play the ♥K. West follows with a low heart, but you have another decision to make. What are you discarding from dummy?

You need to decide which finesse you are planning to take. Let's suppose you decide to rely on the club finesse. You discard a low spade from dummy. You draw a round of trumps with the ♦A. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. The ♦Q draws a second round of trumps. West follows, but East shows out, discarding a club. There's still one trump outstanding. The ♦J draws the last trump as East discards another club.

Having chosen to discard a spade from dummy, everything now hinges on the club finesse. You lead the ♣Q. West follows with a low club, you play dummy's ♣10, and East wins the ♣K.

You have the rest of the tricks, but 6♦ is down one.

It appears you chose the wrong finesse to take. Should you have discarded a club on the ♥K and tried the spade finesse?

Let's go back and try again.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥5, and East wins with the ♥A. East leads the ♥Q.

If you play the ♥K now, you will have to decide whether to discard a spade or a club from dummy. Whichever you choose, you will lose one of the chances to make the contract.

Instead, play a low heart and ruff in dummy.

There's no hurry to win the ♥K. You can always take it later. 

Draw a round of diamonds with the ♦J. Both defenders follow suit. Draw another round of diamonds with the ♦A. West follows, but East shows out. There's still a trump outstanding with West, but that can wait for a moment.

Notice that your chances in spades and clubs are both still intact. Should you try the spade finesse or the club finesse?

Neither right now!

Whenever you have two chances, you want to combine them if possible. You can't try both the spade and the club finesses, but you can improve your chances by playing on spades first.

Start by leading the ♠J.

If West holds the ♠Q, West may choose to cover the ♠J, hoping East holds the ♠10. That would solve all your problems. It never hurts to try. West, however, follows with a low spade. Now what? Should you try the finesse?

No!

You were just testing West. You have no intention of taking the spade finesse. You just want to give yourself an extra chance in spades before falling back on the club finesse. Win the ♠K. East follows with a low spade.

Continue with the ♠A!

You want to give yourself the extra chance that there is a doubleton ♠Q before trying the club finesse.

Success! East's ♠Q falls on this trick. That's the extra chance you were hoping for. No need to take the club finesse now. Draw West's last trump. Notice that if the ♠Q hadn't fallen, you would now be in a position to try your second chance, the club finesse. With the ♠Q gone, the ♠10 is now a winner.

Since you know you don't need the club finesse, you can now take the ♥K and discard a club. You ruff the last heart in dummy. On dummy's established ♠9, you discard a club.

The ♣A is a winner. You ruff the last club, making 6♦. You lost a heart trick, but that's all.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AK93<br>♥ 9<br>♦ KT962<br>♣ AJT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 8754<br>♥ 865<br>♦ 743<br>♣ 864</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q6<br>♥ AQJT4<br>♦ 5<br>♣ K7532</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ JT2<br>♥ K732<br>♦ AQJ8<br>♣ Q9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As you can see, both the spade finesse and the club finesse would lose. The idea is to avoid putting all your eggs in one basket.

Rather than simply choosing one finesse or the other, you start with the spade suit. Playing the ♠A-K gives you the chance the ♠Q will fall doubleton. Leading the ♠J also gives you the chance that West may err by covering with the ♠Q. If you have no luck in spades, you can fall back on the club finesse.

Notice that another key part of the plan is to keep both chances alive by not discarding a spade or a club on the ♥K. You can delay that decision until you found out which suit you don't need.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240912)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240909)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240912#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.