---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-05'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240805'

next:
  text: '2024-08-07'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240807'
---

# 2024-08-06

In today's deal, you have a strong hand, but is it enough to defeat the contract?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ A52<br>♥️ A7<br>♦️ AKJ8<br>♣️ Q975</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. You have to decide what call to make.

The hand is balanced and there are 18 high-card points. That's too strong to open 1NT but not enough to open 2NT. Instead, you can start with a minor suit. Although some players prefer opening 1♣️ with four cards in both minors, the popular style is to open 1♦️. Let's go with that.

West passes, and so does your partner, North. East, in the balancing position, reopens the bidding with a takeout double. The auction is back to you.

If partner had responded at the one level, you were planning to rebid 2NT to show a balanced hand of about 18-19 points. Now that partner has passed, however, there's no need to jump to 2NT to describe your hand. Although you might redouble to show a good hand, a more descriptive rebid is 1NT. Since you would have opened 1NT with a balanced hand and 15-17 points, and you would have passed East's double with a minimum hand of about 12-14 points, a 1NT rebid in this auction shows 18-19 points.

West competes to 2♠️. Partner and East both pass. You have another chance to make a call.

You have already described your hand, and partner has shown no interest in competing. It looks as though the opponents have the balance of power. You have nothing more to say. Your pass ends the auction. Partner will be making the opening lead against West's 2♠️ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>2♠️</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♦️9, and East puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ KT74<br>♥️ KJT<br>♦️ 6542<br>♣️ AK</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ A52<br>♥️ A7<br>♦️ AKJ8<br>♣️ Q975</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays a low diamond from dummy, and you win the first trick with the ♦️K, third hand high, but only as high as necessary. What is going on in the diamond suit?

Partner has led the suit you opened. Partner's ♦️9 must be either a singleton or top of a doubleton. With three or more diamonds, partner would have led a low diamond or the ♦️10 from ♦️Q-10-9. So declarer must have three or four diamonds, including the ♦️Q. What are you playing to trick two?

It certainly looks best to continue with the ♦️A. If partner started with a singleton diamond, you may be able to give partner two diamond ruffs. If partner started with a doubleton diamond, you can still have partner ruff declarer's ♦️Q. Declarer follows with the ♦️10, and partner with the ♦️3. So partner did start with two diamonds, and declarer still has the ♦️Q remaining. You are now at the critical point in the defense. What are you leading to trick three?

Since you can give partner a diamond ruff and get rid of declarer's ♦️Q, a diamond looks like a reasonable continuation. Let's see what will happen when you do. You lead a third round of diamonds. You might as well lead your higher remaining diamond, the ♦️J, as a suit preference signal of the two remaining "obvious" suits, hearts and clubs. You want to tell partner what to lead next. Partner does indeed ruff declarer's ♦️Q. The defense has the first three tricks and, paying attention to you suit preference signal, partner leads a heart. You win the ♥️A, the fourth trick for the defense. Now what?

It looks best to continue with another diamond. Even though both declarer and partner are out of diamonds, you may be able to promote a trump winner for partner. Partner may be able to overruff declarer or it may force declarer to use up a high trump.

Declarer ruffs with the ♠️J, however, and partner can't overruff. Partner discards a low heart. Declarer leads the ♠️Q, and you win the trick with the ♠️A. That's the fifth trick for the defense. But that is also the last trick for your side. Whatever you lead, declarer can draw your remaining trumps and has the rest of the tricks. Declarer just makes the 2♠️ contract. Is there anything you could have done to get a sixth trick?

Let's see.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♦️9, and you win the first trick with the ♦️K. You continue with the ♦️A, which wins the second trick as partner follows suit. You now know that you can give partner a ruff by leading a third round of diamonds. As you've seen, however, that is likely to result in only five tricks for the defense unless partner has an unexpected second spade trick. So where could a sixth trick come from?

The only possibility is if you can get a heart ruff!

However, if you give partner a diamond ruff right now, you will have no way to get back to partner's hand later to give you a heart ruff. How can you manage to get a heart ruff?

You need to lead hearts right now!

You take a trick with the ♥️A. You continue with your remaining heart, and declarer wins the trick. Declarer now leads a low spade from dummy. What are you playing to this trick?

No time to lose. You must win the ♠️A!

Although the general guideline is second hand low, partner will have at most tWo spades. You can't afford to let declarer draw all of partner's trumps before partner can get a diamond ruff. Now you lead a diamond for partner to ruff. Again, you might as well lead the ♦️J to make it crystal clear that you want partner to lead a heart next. Fortunately, partner still has a spade remaining and is able to ruff declarer's ♦️Q. Partner, as requested, leads a heart, and you get to ruff dummy's heart winner. When declarer has to follow suit with a heart, you have the sixth trick for the defense. Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but the 2♠️ contract is down one. You got two diamond tricks, the ♠️A, the ♥️A, and **two** ruffs.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ 93<br>♥️ 86542<br>♦️ 93<br>♣️ J432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ QJ86<br>♥️ Q93<br>♦️ QT7<br>♣️ T86</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ KT74<br>♥️ KJT<br>♦️ 6542<br>♣️ AK</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ A52<br>♥️ A7<br>♦️ AKJ8<br>♣️ Q975</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As a defender, you always have to try to visualize where all the tricks for your side are coming from.

On this deal, once dummy comes down, you can immediately see where five of your tricks are coming from. When partner has a doubleton diamond rather than a singleton diamond, you need to find a sixth trick.

You need a reasonably fortunate lie of the cards. You need partner to have started with two spades. If declarer started with five spades and partner with only one, then you will actually lose a trick on defense by failing to give partner a ruff at trick three. You also need declarer to have started with at least three hearts. Still, the layout you are hoping for is not unreasonable. It's your only chance to defeat the contract, so you might as well try it. An overtrick doesn't mean much... unless you are playing matchpoints. Then you'll have to decide if it is worth the risk.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240806)

### By Category

[<Badge type="info" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240806#links)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240813)

### By Date

Use the links below.