---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-10'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240810'

next:
  text: '2024-08-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240812'
---

# 2024-08-11

Today's column explores the Fourth Suit Forcing convention. 

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

### What is Fourth Suit Forcing?

Fourth Suit Forcing is a convention used by responder on the second round of an uncontested auction. By agreement, responder's bid of the fourth suit is artificial and forcing. Most pairs who use Fourth Suit Forcing play it as forcing to game, and this column will assume that is the partnership agreement.

### Why Artificial

In standard methods, a bid in the fourth suit is natural and forcing. However, allowing responder to bid the fourth suit without promising length in the fourth suit can help solve various bidding problems.

Consider this South hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ63<br>♥ 873<br>♦ K2<br>♣ QJ4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♦, South responds 1♠, and North rebids 2♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If North-South do not play Fourth Suit Forcing, South has no good call available. South does not know in which suit, if any, the partnership
has an eight-card fit. Bidding notrump without a stopper in the unbid
suit, hearts, is risky.

With Fourth Suit Forcing in use, South can bid 2♥ here. Because 2♥ is forcing to game, South does not need to worry about having to jump to show a strong hand.

The 2♥ bid does not promise any length in hearts. It is artificial simply telling North the partnership is heading to game. If North has three-card spade support or can bid notrump with a heart stopper, South will be happy. If not, perhaps North-South can play in a minor suit.

### Searching for a Stopper

In the previous example, South was interested in hearing if North had support for spades or a stopper in hearts. Sometimes, South will only be looking for one specific piece of information.

Take this hand, for example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ3<br>♥ AK84<br>♦ 942<br>♣ Q76</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♣, South responds 1♥, and North rebids 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has a very balanced hand and 14 high-card points, enough to take the partnership to game once North opens the bidding. With three low diamonds, however, jumping to 3NT would be too hasty. Playing standard methods, South has no good bid to make over 1♠. Bidding a "natural" 2♦ would be forcing but would suggest more length in hearts and diamonds. A jump to 3♣ would misdescribe both South's strength and distribution, showing at least four clubs and only an invitational hand of about 11-12 points.

Playing Fourth Suit Forcing, South can bid 2♦. Hopefully, North will rebid 2NT, showing a stopper in diamonds, so South can bid 3NT. If not, South will keep looking for the best contract. If North rebids 3♣, it might be best for North-South to play in clubs. 3NT might go down on a diamond lead while 5♣ or even 6♣ can be made.

### Finding a Major-Suit Fit

Another possibility is that responder wants to check for an eight-card major-suit fit before bidding 3NT.

Here is a possible hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q7<br>♥ KQJ63<br>♦ J82<br>♣ AT9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♦, South responds 1♥, and North rebids 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Playing standard methods, responder could jump to 3NT because South has a stopper in clubs. However, that may not be the best contract if North has three-card heart support and the partnership has an eight-card fit, especially if North is short in clubs.

With Fourth Suit Forcing available, South can start with 2♣. If North raises hearts, South will have uncovered a major-suit fit and can play in hearts. If North does something else, South can steer the partnership toward notrump.

### A Versatile Convention

Most of the time when responder uses Fourth Suit Forcing, it will be to look for a fit in a major suit or a stopper in the fourth suit. Occasionally, responder will have something different in mind.

With this hand, for example, South has some interest in a slam contract.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A82<br>♥ KQ53<br>♦ AJ74<br>♣ K9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♦. South responds 1♥, and North rebids 2♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Responder has a stopper in spades and only four hearts, so it might seem like the best contract will be 3NT. However, with good diamond support and a strong hand - 17 high-card points, plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton club - a slam is very possible. A jump raise to 3♦ is not forcing. A jump raise to 4♦ would take the partnership past 3NT. A jump to 4NT is premature since no trump suit has been agreed.

South can start by forcing to game with 2♠ and support diamonds next. If North has a suitable hand for playing in diamonds, a 6♦ contract might be reached.

### After Fourth Suit

Let's look at a different South hand and go one round further in the auction.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT873<br>♥ KJ52<br>♦ Q2<br>♣ KT</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♦, and South responds 1♠. North rebids 2♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South is interested in finding a 5-3 spade fit and uses Fourth Suit
Forcing by bidding 2♥. North does something unusual by 'raising' the fourth suit to 3♥. What is going on? South has not shown hearts - 2♥ was an artificial bid.

It's true South does not promise hearts with 2♥, but it is still possible South has four or even five hearts in this auction. North's 3♥ is natural, showing four hearts. North may not have had the values to show the hearts on the second round as that would have been a reverse. North also would have rebid 1NT or 2NT over 1♠ with a balanced hand, so North's distribution must be either 1=4=4=4 or 0=4=5=4.

South didn't set out to find a fit in hearts when bidding 2♥, but North's highly descriptive 3V bid has revealed a heart fit. South can continue to 4♥.

Here is another example of showing real length in the fourth suit after a Fourth Suit Forcing bid.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A8543<br>♥ KJT83<br>♦ 7<br>♣ A2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Again, North opens 1♦, South responds 1♠, and North rebids 2♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South bids 2♥, Fourth Suit Forcing, over which North bids 2NT. Since South didn't promise anything in hearts, North's 2NT is showing a stopper in hearts.

2♥ was simply artificial, but South can now rebid hearts to show
actual length in hearts. As the previous example showed, North would bid 3♥ over 2♥ with four hearts. South does not need to search for a heart fit with only four hearts, so bidding 3♥ now shows **five** hearts. There may be a heart fit - North may have 1=3=5=4 distribution - but it is not a guarantee. North could also have 2=2=5=4 distribution and there is no eight-card fit in either major suit.

### What Do You Lose?

There are plenty of ways that Fourth Suit Forcing can help, but adopting any convention means giving up something else.

In this case, responder loses the ability to bid the fourth suit naturally with less than game-forcing values. Suppose South holds a hand like this.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T8<br>♥ QJ742<br>♦ AQ763<br>♣ 5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♣, South responds 1♥, and North rebids 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If 2♦ were natural and forcing, South could rebid 2♦, planning on making a nonforcing bid next.

Playing Fourth Suit Forcing, 2♦ would show a stronger hand than South has here and would not show length in diamonds. The best choice may be to rebid 1NT. This is a slight underbid, with 11 points, but the deal feels like a misfit. Misfitting hands tend to produce fewer tricks than their point-count suggests.

### The Other Side of the Table

So far, we have focused on how responder uses Fourth Suit Forcing, but it is also important to look at how opener bids after responder uses the convention. Most of the time, opener will have an easy rebid over Fourth Suit Forcing. Opener supports responder's major with three-card support, bids notrump with a stopper in the fourth suit, or shows extra length in one of opener's suits.

Here is an example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQT8<br>♥ A2<br>♦ KT8532<br>♣ 6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South opens 1♦, and North responds 1♥. South rebids 1♠, and North
bids 2♣, Fourth Suit Forcing.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South does not have three-card support for hearts, but with six diamonds, South has a painless 2♦ rebid. Even if South had a stopper in the fourth suit, clubs, showing the distribution would be a higher priority than showing the club stopper. North's 2♣ bid announced the partnership will not stop below game. If the only issue is whether clubs are stopped, there will be plenty of time for either partner to bid notrump.

Opener's rebid will not always be so easy. Sometimes, opener will have two features to describe and will have to choose which one to show first.

Consider this South hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q964<br>♥ Q76<br>♦ K5<br>♣ AQ32</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South opens 1♣, and North responds 1♥. After South rebids 1♠, North bids 2♦, Fourth Suit Forcing.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has both three-card heart support and a stopper in diamonds. Which is best to show?

Again, it is usually correct to show the distribution - the three-card heart support - before the stopper, the diamond honor. 2♥ also has the advantage of keeping the bidding as low as possible, giving responder room to make a descriptive bid. South can still bid notrump on the next round.

A more serious problem can arise when opener has no good rebid after Fourth Suit Forcing.

Here is an example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 9<br>♥ 632<br>♦ AT854<br>♣ AKJT</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South deals and opens 1♦. North responds 1♠, and South rebids 2♣.
North bids 2♥, Fourth Suit Forcing.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South cannot support spades with a singleton, and bidding 2NT without a heart stopper is not appealing. South's best option might be to rebid one of the minor suits, despite holding no additional length than South has shown. The clubs are strong and the diamonds are weak, so 3♣ looks like a better choice than 3♦. Switch the honors in the minor suits and South might bid 3♦.

### Summary

Fourth Suit Forcing is a very valuable tool that many partnerships employ. Knowing when to use it and how to continue after responder bids the fourth suit can help you get more mileage out of this convention.

## Questions

North-South have agreed to play Fourth Suit Forcing to game.

### 01

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 874<br>♥ AJ653<br>♦ K5<br>♣ KQ2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♦**

This is a good hand for Fourth Suit Forcing. You can bid 2♦ to find out if North has three-card heart support. If not, you can suggest notrump.

Playing standard methods, South would probably bid 3NT and might miss a five-three heart fit.

### 02

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT2<br>♥ AT83<br>♦ A4<br>♣ AQJ4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♦**

3NT might be the right contract, but you have a very strong hand in support of clubs, and there might be a slam. You can start with 2♦, Fourth Suit Forcing, and raise clubs next. No worry about being passed since the partnership is committed to at least game. If partner doesn't show any interest, you can settle into a game in notrump.

### 03

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 732<br>♥ AT94<br>♦ K92<br>♣ AQ3</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♠**

You have a balanced hand, and 3NT is probably the best contract if partner has one or more spade stoppers. Playing standard methods, South would have no good rebid option but, with Fourth Suit Forcing, South can bid 2♠, hoping that North can bid 2NT. If North cannot bid notrump, North-South may belong in diamonds.

### 04

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ872<br>♥ AT32<br>♦ 8<br>♣ A97</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**4♥**

This is a special Fourth Suit Forcing sequence. North's 'raise' of South's 2♥ bid shows a four-card heart suit. North's distribution should be 1=4=4=4 or 0=4=5=4. Since the partnership has found a 4-4 heart fit, South can bid 4♥.

### 05

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, and North-South are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ83<br>♥ JT4<br>♦ AT42<br>♣ A6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♥**

You have a stopper in the unbid suit, clubs, but showing three-card support for partner's major is more important. There will be time to bid notrump later if that is Where the partnership belongs.

### 06

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQT32<br>♥ 87<br>♦ Q93<br>♣ AJ5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♥**

Fourth Suit Forcing to game is a perfect tool for this hand. If North can show three-card spade support, South can place the contract in spades. If North can show a heart stopper by bidding 2NT, South can bid 3NT. Otherwise, South can suggest playing in diamonds.

### 07

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A9542<br>♥ KQT93<br>♦ K4<br>♣ 8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3♥**

Partner has denied four hearts by failing to raise to 3V over your artificial 2♥, but there might still be a 5-3 heart fit. You can rebid 3♥ to show at least 5-5 in spades and hearts. Partner will know you have five hearts since you would not be searching for a 4-4 heart fit after partner didn't raise 2♥.

### 08

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K3<br>♥ AJT732<br>♦ 6<br>♣ KQ83</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♥**

You have a convenient 2♥ rebid over partner's artificial Fourth Suit Forcing 2♦ bid. 2♥ suggests a six-card heart suit and leaves responder with plenty of space to continue describing the North hand if partner is still unsure Where to play.

### 09

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ A9852<br>♦ T4<br>♣ KQ432</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1NT (2NT)**

This is a poor hand for Fourth Suit Forcing. South is too weak to bid 24. With 11 points - 9 high-card points plus 2 length points - South technically has enough strength to invite game. 2NT is the only invitational call available, and that is overly ambitious. South might be better off underbidding with 1NT on this misfit deal.

### 10

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ82<br>♥ 43<br>♦ 87<br>♣ AKJ93</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3♣**

You do not have an ideal bid to make. Without three-card support for hearts or a diamond stopper, your best option looks like rebidding the strong five-card club suit. You would prefer to have a six-card suit to bid 3♣ here, but no other option looks better.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240811)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240807)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240814)

### By Date

Use the links below.