---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-10'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240910'

next:
  text: '2024-09-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240912'
---

# 2024-09-11

Today's quiz is based on Audrey Grant Improving Your Judgment 2: Doubles - The Takeout Double - Part 1.

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

### The Takeout Double

In every auction when it is your turn to call you have a choice between bidding or passing. In a competitive auction, a third option becomes available, the double.

Originally, the double was meant for penalty. If partner doubled an opponent's call, you were expected to pass and defend. In the modern game the use of the double as a competitive tool has increased in popularity.

Today, a double is most commonly used as a takeout double. But the double can be used in many other situations. It's the game's most versatile call. The versatility of the double can present a challenge for the partnership. Some doubles are meant to be taken out; some are meant to be left in for penalties; some fall somewhere in between. 

Let's begin with the classic takeout double.

### Hand Valuation

The value of a hand is a combination of the high cards and distribution. When you make a takeout double, you are expecting partner to choose a trump suit. If your side wins the auction, your hand will then be put down on the table as dummy. This affects your thinking when valuing your hand.

When the opponents open the bidding in a suit, a takeout double shows:

- Support for the unbid suits - at least three-card support,
preferably four-card support for an unbid major suit

- 13+ points counting dummy points - void - 5 points; singleton - 3
points; doubleton - 1 point.

Consider this hand after East has opened the bidding 1♦.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJT8<br>♥ Q8763<br>♦ <br>♣ K943</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

There are only 10 high-card points but the diamond void can be counted as 5 dummy points, making a total of 15 points. You expect to play the hand in a suit contract other than diamonds with partner as the declarer. The double is more flexible than 1♥. The partnership could find a fit in any of the three unbid suits.

Ideally, the doubler should have four-card or longer support for the unbid suits, leaving a singleton or void in the opponent's suit. In practice, you won't be making enough use of the takeout double if you wait for the ideal distribution. Three-card support for one of the unbid suits... or even two of the unbid suits if you have some extra strength... is generally enough.

Suppose you hold this hand and East opens 1♦.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ5<br>♥ J964<br>♦ 93<br>♣ AQ6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This hand qualifies for a takeout double with 14 high-card points plus 1 distribution point for the doubleton diamond. It has acceptable shape with four-card support for hearts and spades, and reasonable three-card support if partner chooses clubs. With a choice between a four-card major and a four- or five-card minor suit, partner will prefer bidding the major suit in response to your takeout double.

Here's another example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q764<br>♥ 8<br>♦ AK63<br>♣ KJ42</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East has again opened 1♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

A double would show support for the unbid suits and partner might respond in hearts. This hand is unsuitable for a takeout double. There is also no good suit to overcall. You don't have to bid just because you have 13 points. Pass.

Suppose after East opens 1♦, you hold this hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK984<br>♥ KT3<br>♦ 6<br>♣ QT86</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This hand has three-card or longer support for the three unbid suits. However, there is a definite preference for the spade suit. With a borderline hand, it is more important to have four-card support for an unbid major than an unbid minor suit. The more strength you have, the more you can afford to deviate from the ideal distribution. Extra high cards compensate for the ack of support in one of the unbid suits.

### Other Considerations

Once you have valued your hand, consider the level and the vulnerability. The higher the level your takeout double forces partner to bid, the more you require. There is no guarantee that partner has any strength at all, so you must have enough to be willing to commit the partnership to the appropriate level. That level isn't always clear cut, however.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJT7<br>♥ 7<br>♦ AT42<br>♣ KQ95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

This time East has opened 3♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner will be able to bid spades at the three level but will have to go to the four level to bid clubs or diamonds. With 13 high-card points plus 3 dummy points for the singleton heart, this hand has adequate strength whichever suit partner chooses.

Compare this hand to the previous example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJT7<br>♥ 873<br>♦ A42<br>♣ KQ5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

The high-card points are the same but this hand doesn't have the same shape so there are no distribution points. You would need more high-card strength to start competing at the three level much less the four level. Pass.

Any competitive action runs the risk of getting the partnership too high and being doubled for penalties by the opponents. Vulnerability is usually only a consideration with a borderline decision. In most cases, it can be ignored. Consider being cautious when you are vulnerable and the opponents are not. When you are non-vulnerable and the opponents are vulnerable, you can afford to be aggressive since the opponents won't be satisfied collecting a small penalty if they think they can make a game or a slam. At equal vulnerability - both sides non-vulnerable or both sides vulnerable - take the middle road, not too cautious nor too aggressive.

### After Left-Hand Opponent Opens

The takeout double can also be used when your left-hand opponent has opened the bidding, partner passes, and right-hand opponent bids.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ95<br>♥ 6<br>♦ KQ62<br>♣ AT73</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Here, West opens 1♥, partner, North, passes, and East raises to 2♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This is a straight-forward takeout double for the unbid suits: spades, diamonds, and clubs. With 14 high-card points plus 3 dummy points for the singleton heart, there is more than enough to compete at the two level in spades or the three level if partner chooses a minor.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT72<br>♥ AJ83<br>♦ 94<br>♣ KQ5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

In this auction, West opens the bidding 1♦ and after partner, North, passes, East responds 1NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This is also a takeout double for the unbid suits: spades, hearts, and clubs. You would have made a takeout double of 1♦ if the opening bid was on your right. There is no need to be deterred by the 1NT response. East could have as few as 6 points, leaving plenty of room for partner to hold some strength.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A6<br>♥ KQT5<br>♦ 64<br>♣ KQ983</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Here West opens 1♦, and partner, North passes. East responds 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This is a takeout double for the unbid suits. This time, there are only two unbid suits: hearts and clubs. You are asking partner to choose one of them and showing a willingness to compete at least to the two level. Double is more flexible than overcalling 2♣.

## Questions

### 01

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ75<br>♥ QT93<br>♦ K842<br>♣ 9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

There are only 10 high-card points but you can add 3 dummy points for the singleton club. With the ideal distribution for a takeout double it's worth competing, even if your side is vulnerable. Partner will be able to choose a suit at the one level.

### 02

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT84<br>♥ AJ5<br>♦ QJ73<br>♣ K6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

The shape isn't ideal with only three-card support for hearts, but the extra strength in high cards should be enough compensation.

### 03

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ KJ75<br>♦ A9863<br>♣ K642</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

11 high-card points plus 5 dummy points for the spade void is more than enough for a takeout double, even though partner will have to choose a suit at the two level.

### 04

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT73<br>♥ 94<br>♦ KQ73<br>♣ A95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass**

Without support for hearts, it would be too risky to make a takeout double on this hand. You don't have to bid just because you hold 12 or more points. You may get another chance to bid later in the auction.

### 05

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT95<br>♥ 6<br>♦ AK83<br>♣ AJ85</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

Although partner will have to bid at the three or four level, your excellent support for the unbid suits and your strength - 14 high-card points plus 3 dummy points for the singleton heart - should be enough to compete.

### 06

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J75<br>♥ KQJ9<br>♦ AK<br>♣ T972</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass**

A double would be for takeout, not for penalty. Partner still has an opportunity to bid. If partner doubles, you can pass and collect a large penalty.

### 07

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 4<br>♥ KJ753<br>♦ AQ842<br>♣ 95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

Not too much in the way of high cards but you definitely want to suggest competing in hearts or diamonds.

### 08

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ4<br>♥ K84<br>♦ A63<br>♣ QJ72</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass**

You have some high cards but not enough support for the two unbid suits. Best to keep quiet and keep out of trouble.

### 09

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 54<br>♥ AK82<br>♦ A93<br>♣ K763</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

This is for takeout of spades. Although the standard agreement is that a double of a 1NT opening bid is for penalty, the double of a 1NT response is for takeout of opener's suit.

### 10

You are South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK62<br>♥ AKJ4<br>♦ 94<br>♣ J74</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>3♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

There is enough for a takeout double at the three level with 16 high-card points and 1 dummy point for the doubleton diamond. You need more than a minimum takeout double to bring partner into the auction at the three level or higher especially when vulnerable.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240911)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240908)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240911#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.