---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-23'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240823'

next:
  text: '2024-08-25'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240825'
---

# 2024-08-24

On this deal, with no help from partner, can you still make the contract?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT9852<br>♥ 54<br>♦ 84<br>♣ KJ2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Suppose you are sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. East is the dealer and passes. You have to decide what call to make with this hand.

With 8 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit, there isn't enough strength to open the bidding at the one level. You could pass with this hand. However, the modern popular style is open 2♠, a weak two-bid. Some might like a better suit, but it does have good interior spot cards.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 2♠ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦Q, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ KJ93<br>♦ AK9753<br>♣ Q64</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AT9852<br>♥ 54<br>♦ 84<br>♣ KJ2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

That's a disappointing dummy! A spade void! You are missing seven spades, including the ♠K-Q-J. Even if the defenders' spades are divided 4-3, there appear to be three potential losers. There are two potential heart losers. Although dummy has the ♥K and ♥J, the opponents hold the ♥A and ♥Q. There is one sure club loser since you are missing the ♣A. There aren't any diamond losers since dummy's ♦A-K will take care of the two low diamonds in your hand. So assuming you don't have more than three spade losers, there are six potential losers: three spades, two hearts, and a club. You'll have to eliminate one of the losers.

It doesn't look as though you can do much about the spade losers unless an honor falls when you play the ♠A.

In hearts, however, there is the possibility of avoiding a loser with the help of a finesse. You can plan to lead a heart toward dummy and guess whether to play dummy's ♥K or ♥J if West follows with a low heart. If West holds both the ♥A and ♥Q, you can't go wrong. Whichever honor you choose to play from dummy will win. If East holds both the ♥A and ♥Q, you can't go right. Both the ♥J and ♥K will lose. If West holds the ♥Q and East the ♥A, the winning choice is to play dummy's ♥J. If West holds the ♥A and East the ♥Q, the winning choice is to play dummy's ♥K.

So it appears the contract hinges on finding a favorable lie of the hearts and guessing which honor to play when you lead a heart toward dummy. Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦Q. You win the first trick with dummy's ♦K as East follows with the ♦2. Suppose you lead a club at trick two. East plays low, you play the ♣J, and it wins the trick as West follows with a low club. What now?

It seems reasonable to start drawing the defenders' trumps. There's no hurry to play the hearts. Suppose you play the ♠A. No spade honor appears. Both defenders follow with low spades. You continue with a second round of spades. West plays low and East wins the ♠J.

East leads back the ♦10. Dummy's ♦A wins the trick as West follows with a low diamond. Suppose you lead another club from dummy. This time, East wins the ♣A. East leads another club, and you win the ♣K as West follows with a low club.

You lead another round of trumps. West wins the ♠Q as East follows with a low spade. The ♠K is still outstanding, but at least the defenders' spades have divided 4-3.

West leads a diamond, East discards the ♥10, and you ruff. East's ♥10 is an encouraging attitude signal, so things don't look good. Nonetheless, you don't have much choice but to hope you can guess hearts successfully.

You lead a low heart and West follows with a low heart. Let's suppose you try dummy's ♥J. Unfortunately, that loses to East's ♥Q. Did you misguess?

East leads a club. You ruff, and West overruffs with the defenders' last spade, the ♠K. West leads a heart. You play dummy's ♥K and East wins the ♥A. At least you didn't misguess the hearts. East had both the ♥A and ♥Q. You couldn't guess right!

Your trump wins the last trick, but the 2♠ contract is down one. You lost three spades, two hearts, and a club.

That seems about the best you could do with the defenders' spades dividing 4-3 and East holding both the ♥A and ♥Q. When this actual deal was played in a 1965 match that pitted the traditional bidders against the more scientific bidders, sitting South as declarer was Sam Stayman, a member of the "scientific" team. So how did Stayman handle the play?

## Actual Play

Sam Stayman got the same opening lead of the ♦Q and won the first trick with dummy's ♦K. He led a club from dummy and, when East played low, he won the ♣J.

In case the hearts lay unfavorably, Stayman decided to try to avoid losing three spade tricks. To accomplish that, he had to reduce the number of spades he held. He led a diamond to dummy's ♦A as both defenders followed. He then led a diamond from dummy. East showed out, discarding a heart. Since West still held a diamond, he could ruff with the lowly ♠2.

Next, he tried to guess the heart suit. He led a low heart and, when West followed with a low heart, he tried dummy's ♥K. This lost to East's ♥A.

East chose to lead a low spade, trying to prevent declarer from getting too many tricks with low spades. Stayman played the ♠8, losing to West's ♠Q.

Here are the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ J93<br>♦ 97<br>♣ Q6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K73<br>♥ 87<br>♦ <br>♣ T5</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J6<br>♥ QT<br>♦ <br>♣ A87</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AT95<br>♥ 5<br>♦ <br>♣ K2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

West couldn't afford to lead another spade since that would sacrifice one of the defenders' spade honors. Instead, West led a club and East won the ♣A. Stayman was careful to play the ♣K on this trick. East took a trick with the ♥Q. The defense had four tricks, so Stayman could afford to lose only one more trick. East continued with the ♥10. Rather than discarding his remaining club, Stayman ruffed this with the ♠5 as West followed with another heart.

Thanks to unblocking the ♣K earlier, Stayman could get to dummy with the ♣Q. He led a diamond from dummy. He could also have led a heart. East discarded a club, and Stayman ruffed with the ♠9. West overruffed with the ♠K.

West was endplayed. Whatever West led would allow Stayman to win the last two tricks. With nothing but spades remaining, West led a low spade, but this trapped East's remaining ♠J and low spade. East played the ♠J, and Stayman won the ♠A.

Stayman's ♠10 drew both the defenders' remaining low trumps. He had made the 2♠ contract, losing one club, two hearts, but only **two** spades.

## The Rest of the Story

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ KJ93<br>♦ AK9753<br>♣ Q64</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ73<br>♥ 876<br>♦ QJ6<br>♣ T53</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J64<br>♥ AQT2<br>♦ T2<br>♣ A987</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AT9852<br>♥ 54<br>♦ 84<br>♣ KJ2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

It's never too much fun to play in a 6-0 trump fit, when the opponents have more trumps than you do. If you can't afford to draw trumps, then another approach is to try to get as many tricks as you can with your trumps.

On this deal, Sam Stayman maneuvered to take four spade tricks. Along with two club tricks and two diamond tricks, that was enough to make the contract despite the unfavorable heart lie.

There has long been an argument about the extent to which artificial methods help a partnership achieve better results.

When an exhibition match was tried in 1965, Sam Stayman qualified to be a member of the "scientists" team since he had his name attached to one of the most popular conventions in the game, even though it was not actually his invention. Using 2♣ to ask for a major suit after a 1NT opening bid was actually invented by Stayman's partner, George Rappe, and independently by Jack Marx. However, Stayman first published an article about it in The Bridge World magazine in 1945, and his name has been associated with the convention ever since.

The 1965 contest didn't prove much since the match ended in a virtual tie. In fact, in those days, there wasn't much difference between the methods used by the "naturalists" and those used by the "scientists."

A rematch was held in 1992, by which time many more artificial methods had been introduced. The sponsor of the 1992 contest was Demetri Marchessini, a shipping tycoon who believed that conventions hurt the game. He was a prominent member of the Portland Club in London, which had a long tradition going back to the days of Ely Culbertson opposing the use of artificial conventions. Marchessini put up the stake for the Naturalists. The total prize was about $100,000. The only convention used by the Naturalists was Blackwood. Stayman wasn't allowed. Again, the result was inconclusive. Although the scientists won the overall score, the naturalists won two of the three sessions.

In 2007, a further rematch was held. This one was played on Bridge Base Online so the whole world could watch. This time, the scientists came out on top although the teams weren't very evenly matched. The scientists were all world class players. None of the naturalists were. However, almost everyone agreed it was a fun contest.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240824)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240823)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240826)

### By Date

Use the links below.