---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-16'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240816'

next: false
---

# 2024-08-17

In today's deal, there's a lot riding on a good result from this deal.

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ AJ9543<br>♥️ AK5<br>♦️ T92<br>♣️ 2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Suppose you are sitting South with both sides vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens 1♣️. Your partner, North, passes, and East responds 1♥️.

There are 12 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit. With a good six-card suit, you have a sound overcall of 1♠️.

West now bids 2♦️. This is a reverse, showing a good hand with at least five clubs and four diamonds. Partner cuebids 3♣️. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Despite West showing a good hand, partner's cuebid shows good support for spades and an invitational or better hand. You have a very good hand for a one-level overcall with a sixth spade, two aces and a king, and a singleton. That's enough to accept partner's invitation and bid game in spades.

The auction doesn't end there, however. West bids 4NT. Since no suit has yet been agreed by East-West, this is not the Blackwood convention. It shows a strongly distributional hand with at least five diamonds and six clubs, asking East to choose one of the minor suits. Partner passes, East chooses 5♦️, and you have another chance to make a call.

You expected to make 4♠️ and, even though West has shown a strong, distributional hand, you have good defense with two aces and partner promising some values. You don't want to be pushed any higher but can double the opponent's contract for penalty. Let's go with that.

Everyone passes, and you are now defending against West's 5♦️ doubled with partner on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣️</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥️</td>
		<td>1♠️</td>
		<td>2♦️</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♣️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠️</td>
		<td>4NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>5♦️</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Against West's 5♦️ doubled, partner leads the ♠️7. East puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ Q62<br>♥️ T98742<br>♦️ J85<br>♣️ 7</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ AJ9543<br>♥️ AK5<br>♦️ T92<br>♣️ 2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays a low spade from dummy, and you have your first decision. What are you playing to this trick?

If partner has four spades, as is likely from the auction, then declarer has none. If partner has only three spades without the ♠️K, partner would have led the top of nothing. So, partner's low spade lead means partner has the ♠️K. In either case, you might as well play the ♠️J.

Declarer ruffs this trick. Partner has started with four spades. Declarer takes a trick with the ♣️A. Declarer leads another club and ruffs with dummy's ♦️8 when partner plays the ♣️10. You are at the critical point in the defense. What are you playing to this trick?

It seems natural to overruff with the ♦️9. At least, that's one trick for the defense, compensating for your being ruffed. Let's see what will happen if you do.

Suppose you win the trick, overruffing dummy's ♦️8 with the ♦️9. What now?

You might as well see how many heart tricks you are getting. You play the ♥️A and it wins the trick. That's two tricks now for the defense. You continue with your other high heart, but declarer ruffs. There goes another of the tricks you were hoping to take. Well, you have taken two tricks. Hopefully, partner can come up with a trick.

Declarer leads the ♣️J and, when partner plays the ♣️Q, ruffs with ♦️J. You can't overruff that, so you discard a spade. Declarer leads dummy's remaining diamond, drawing a round of trumps. Declarer draws another round of trumps, as both you and partner follow again. Partner doesn't have any diamond winners. Declarer leads another club and partner wins with the ♣️K. That's good. Partner has produced a trick, and the contract is going down.

Partner leads the ♥️Q, but declarer still has a trump remaining and ruffs this trick.

Declarer, however, has nothing but clubs remaining and takes the last three tricks. The 5♦️ doubled contract is defeated one trick. Since the opponents are vulnerable, you collect a penalty of 200 points. That seems okay since your side couldn't make 5♠️. The opponents had two diamonds and a club winner to take.

Unfortunately, if this is the result you bring back to your teammates at the end of the match, you would be disappointed. On the actual deal, at the other table, the same contract was reached. It went down two tricks for a penalty of 500 points when your teammates misplayed the hand slightly. Your +200 points and your teammates' loss of 500 points results in a net 300 points loss on the deal, or -7 IMPs.

This deal was played in the final match of the 1985 International Team Trial to determine the team to represent the U.S. in the upcoming Bermuda Bowl World Championship in Brazil. Sitting South was Bob Hamman, playing with Bobby Woff. Marty Bergen was West and Larry Cohen was East. Although the auction went a little differently, the same contract was reached. Let's see what happened when Hamman was defending the 5♦️ doubled contract.

## The Actual Defense

The play started the same way. Bobby Wolff, North, led a spade, and Hamman played the ♠️J when a low spade was played from dummy. Declarer ruffed the first trick. Declarer took a trick with the ♣️A. Declarer led another club, ruffing with dummy's ♦️8 when North followed with the ♣️10.

Before automatically overruffing, however, Hamman considered the situation carefully. Hamman knew from the auction that West held at least five diamonds and six or more clubs. He could see what would happen if he overruffed at this point. The play would follow the line you have already seen and declarer would go down only one trick.

So he refused to overruff!

Instead, he discarded a heart and held on to all three of his trumps. Let's see the difference this made.

Here are all four hands.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ KT8<br>♥️ QJ3<br>♦️ 43<br>♣️ KQ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ 6<br>♦️ AKQ7<br>♣️ J9654</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ Q6<br>♥️ T98742<br>♦️ J5<br>♣️ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ A9543<br>♥️ AK<br>♦️ T92<br>♣️ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer led a heart from dummy, and Hamman won the ♥️K. Hamman then led a spade, and declarer was forced to ruff. Declarer had already ruffed twice and was down to three trumps, the same as Hamman.

Declarer ruffed a club with dummy's ♦️J. Declarer got back to the West hand with a diamond, drawing a round of trumps. Declarer drew another round of trumps. And declarer drew Hamman's third trump as North discarded a spade. However, that was declarer's last trump.

Declarer had to give up a club trick to North's ♣️K. That established declarer's remaining cards, but declarer was out of trumps. North took a trick with the ♠️K. North led a heart, and Hamman won the ♥️A. Hamman's ♠️A won the last trick.

Hamman's defense had defeated the contract three tricks, for a penalty of 800 points.

## The Rest of the Story

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ KT87<br>♥️ QJ3<br>♦️ 43<br>♣️ KQT8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ 6<br>♦️ AKQ76<br>♣️ AJ96543</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ Q62<br>♥️ T98742<br>♦️ J85<br>♣️ 7</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ AJ9543<br>♥️ AK5<br>♦️ T92<br>♣️ 2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

It took a lot of foresight not to overruff when declarer ruffed the second round of clubs with dummy's ♦️8. However, Hamman realized that it was more important to hold on to all three of his trumps. Declarer already had to ruff a spade and would have to ruff either a heart or a spade to get back to the West hand. That would leave declarer with only three diamonds, the same number as Hamman. Whatever declarer did next, declarer was going to run out of trumps before the clubs could be established. Declarer would then lose control of the deal, allowing the defense to take its remaining winners after declarer had to give up the lead to North's last club winner.

By refusing to overruff, Hamman never took a trump trick but defeated the contract three tricks for a penalty of 800 points. Since his teammates had lost 500 points on this deal at the other table, Hamman's team gained 300 points on the deal, or 7 IMPs. By winning 7 IMPs rather than losing 7 IMPs if the penalty were only 200 points, Hamman's team won the trials. They won by only 5 IMPs. Without Hamman's defense, they would have lost by 9 IMPs.

Hamman was awarded the prize for the Best Defense of the Year by the International Bridge Press Association. His team also went on to win the World Championship.

Hamman would also win the award for the Best Defense of the Year again in 1993. When Bob Hamman was inducted into the Bridge Hall of Fame in 1999, he had been the highest ranked player in the world for ten years, starting in 1985.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240817)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240813)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240817#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.