---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-08'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240908'

next:
  text: '2024-09-10'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240910'
---

# 2024-09-09

In this column, what is the best chance for the additional trick you need?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A9<br>♥ KJT9863<br>♦ J<br>♣ AJ6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♦. East passes. You must decide on a response.

With 14 high-card points plus 3 length points for the seven-card suit, there is more than enough strength to take the partnership to at least game once partner opens the bidding at the one level. The priority, however, is to first determine Where the partnership belongs. You start by responding in the seven-card major suit, 1♥.

West makes a preemptive jump overcall of 3♣ showing a good seven-card suit but a weak hand. North bids 3♥. East passes, and you have to decide what to do after this development.

Partner should have more than a minimum opening bid to show the heart support at the three level. That makes slam a possibility if the partnership isn't missing too many aces. Having agreed on hearts as the trump suit, you can check for aces uses the Blackwood convention, 4NT.

West passes. North replies 5♦ to the Blackwood inquiry. Playing standard methods, that shows one ace. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

The partnership is missing one ace, but that should be okay for a small slam contract. You put the partnership in 6♥.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are the declarer in 6♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>3♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>5♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>6♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣10. Dummy comes down with four-card heart support and only 12 high-card points but partner added 5 dummy points for the club void.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QJ5<br>♥ AQ52<br>♦ K97542<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A9<br>♥ KJT9863<br>♦ J<br>♣ AJ6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In 6♥, you can afford to lose only one trick. In a suit contract, even a slam, begin by counting the potential losers. There aren't any heart losers since you hold all the top hearts between the combined hands. There is a potential spade loser since the opponents hold the ♠K. There is a diamond loser since the opponents hold the ♦A. There will be two club losers remaining after the ♣A is gone. That's four losers, three more than you can afford. Three losers must be eliminated if you are to make the contract.

Both the club losers can be ruffed in the dummy. No problem there.

There is nothing which can be done about the diamond loser. If West holds the ♦A, however, the ♦K can be turned into a winner with the help of a finesse. There is also the possibility of establishing an extra diamond winner through length. 

The spade loser can be avoided with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♠K. The ♠Q can be led from dummy to trap the ♠K. Alternatively, the spade loser might be discarded on an extra diamond winner in dummy.

So it appears you can try to establish a diamond winner on which to discard the spade loser. If that doesn't work, you can fall back on the spade finesse.

Is that good enough?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣10. You discard a low diamond from dummy and East plays the ♣K. You win the ♣A. Missing only two hearts, there doesn't appear to be any reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. Suppose you start with the ♥K. West discards a club. East started with both missing hearts. The ♥J draws East's remaining heart as West discards another club.

You can now give yourself the first chance of finding the ♦A favorably placed. You lead the ♦J and, when West follows with a low diamond, you try dummy's ♦K. Unfortunately, this loses to East's ♦A. So much for that chance.

East continues with the ♦Q and you ruff as West follows with a second diamond. There are only two diamonds outstanding, so there is still a chance of establishing an extra diamond winner through length.

You ruff a club loser with one of dummy's hearts. That was part of the plan and it gets you to dummy where you can try for a favorable diamond division. You lead another diamond. East follows and you ruff. Unfortunately, West shows out, discarding another club. The defenders' diamonds have divided 4-2, so there goes that chance.

You can ruff the last club loser to get back to dummy. Time for the last chance. You lead the ♠Q from dummy and, when East follows with a low spade, you play low, taking the finesse. Unfortunately, West wins with the ♠K. So much for your last chance.

You have the rest of the tricks, but the contract is down one. The diamond finesse lost, the diamonds divided 4-2, and the spade finesse lost. That was unlucky, but could you have made the contract anyway?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣10, you discard a low diamond from dummy, East plays the ♣K, and you win the ♣A.

You have the chances of the diamond finesse, the spade finesse, and establishing a trick through length in diamonds. Of these three, the best odds are establishing a trick through length in diamonds. That will work if the six missing diamonds divide no worse than 4-2 and the odds of that are nearly 85%. You can also combine that with the chance of West holding the ♦A.

However, the entries to dummy are all in the heart suit and you may need all four of them to both establish and reach the diamond winner. You can't afford to waste any of them.

So that means you must delay drawing trumps and go after the diamonds right away.

Let's see how that works. At trick two, you immediately lead the singleton diamond toward dummy. When West plays low, you try the ♦K. The first chance doesn't work when East wins with the ♦A. However, your main chance is still in play.

East shifts to a spade and you have to decide what to do. The odds of a favorable diamond break are better than the 50% odds of the spade finesse, so you want to go with them. You win the ♠A.

You now make use of your first heart entry by leading a low heart to dummy's ♥Q. You are drawing a round of trumps at the same time. West shows out, discarding a club. East started with both the missing trumps. You use the entry to lead a diamond and ruff with one of your trumps.

When both defenders follow, the contract becomes guaranteed. The defenders' diamonds have divided no worse than 4-2. You cross back to dummy's ♥A, drawing East's remaining trump at the same time. This is your second entry to dummy. You use this entry to lead another diamond and ruff it. East follows but West shows out, discarding a club. The diamonds have divided 4-2, but that's okay. You have prepared for that.

You can get back to dummy for a third time by ruffing one of the club losers. You use this entry to lead another round of diamonds. East plays the ♦Q, the defenders' last diamond, and you ruff. Dummy's remaining diamond has now been established as the winner you need. 

You cross back to dummy for a fourth and final time by ruffing the remaining club loser. You are finally in the right place at the right time to take the established diamond winner and discard the spade loser.

You can ruff a spade back to your hand. You no longer need the finesse. You have a heart winner remaining and have made the contract. You lost one diamond trick, but that's all. You made the contract even though the diamond and spade finesses weren't working and the diamonds divided 4-2.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QJ5<br>♥ AQ52<br>♦ K97542<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K742<br>♥ <br>♦ 63<br>♣ Q97432</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T863<br>♥ 74<br>♦ AQT8<br>♣ K85</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A9<br>♥ KJT9863<br>♦ J<br>♣ AJ6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner's club void wasn't exactly the values you were expecting. The ♠K would have made things easier. However, partner did provide enough to give you an excellent chance of making twelve tricks. You have chances with the diamond finesse and the spade finesse, but establishing an extra winner through length in diamonds is the chance with the best odds.

You'd like to combine all three chances, but that isn't possible if East returns a spade after winning a diamond. You have to choose to go with the chance offering the best odds. At the same time, you have to use your entries to best advantage. By starting with diamonds right away, you preserve the four heart entries to help establish and reach the needed extra trick. No time to waste!

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240909)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240907)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240912)

### By Date

Use the links below.