---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-18'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240918'

next:
  text: '2024-09-20'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240920'
---

# 2024-09-19

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 43<br>♥ A54<br>♦ KJ43<br>♣ AKQ5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

You have a balanced hand with 17 high-card points. The two low spades don't prevent you from opening 1NT when the partnership range is 15-17 points. If you are worried, you can move the ♣Q to the spade suit to bolster your confidence!

West passes, and partner, North, responds 2♣. East passes, and you have to choose a rebid.

Partner's 2♣ is the Stayman convention, asking whether you have a four-card or longer major suit. With no major suit, you make the artificial reply of 2♦.

West passes, and partner now jumps to 3NT. After East passes, you have another chance to make a call.

Partner's 3NT rebid is a signoff bid. You've described the hand by opening 1NT and then showing no major suit. Based on that, partner has chosen to play game in notrump. You have no reason to override partner's decision. You pass.

West passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠7. Partner puts down the dummy, and you have to find nine tricks to make the contract.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQT2<br>♥ 98<br>♦ Q2<br>♣ JT432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 43<br>♥ A54<br>♦ KJ43<br>♣ AKQ5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

West has led the suit you were worried about, but spades turn out to be partner's strongest suit.

Time to make a plan by first counting the sure tricks. There is one sure spade winner, the ♠A. There is also one sure heart trick, the ♥A.There are five sure club tricks since you hold all the high clubs and dummy has a five-card suit. There are no sure diamond tricks since the opponents hold the ♦A. That's a total of seven sure winners: a spade, a heart, and five clubs. You need to find two more tricks.

You aren't getting any more tricks from the heart or club suits.

In spades, West's lead of the ♠7 is presumably fourth best. What information does that give you about the defenders' spade holdings?

You can apply the Rule of Eleven. Subtracting West's lead of the 7 from 11 leaves 4 higher-ranking spades in the other three hands. You can see three of them in dummy, so East must have only one spade higher ranking than the ♠7. If East's higher spade is the ♠8 or ♠9, you can get two extra tricks by finessing the ♠10 and later the ♠Q. If East's higher spade is either the ♠J or ♠K, then you can get only one extra winner. If you finesse the ♠10 and it loses to the ♠J, you "know" that a subsequent finesse of the ♠Q will win. Similarly, if you play the ♠Q and it loses to the ♠K, a later finesse of the ♠10 should win.

In diamonds, you can promote two winners by driving out the ♦A.

So, you might get two extra winners from the spade suit and you can promote two extra diamond winners.

Is there any danger?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠7. You are immediately faced with a key decision. Should you finesse dummy's ♠10 or ♠Q?

Neither!

Let's see the danger of taking any spade finesse at trick one. Suppose you start by finessing the ♠10. East wins the ♠K. That seems like a success. You've established dummy's ♠Q as one of the extra tricks you need. All would be fine if East continued with another spade. You could drive out the ♦A and make an overtrick.

However, seeing the futility in continuing spades, East now switches to the ♥Q. That's not good. You can hold up winning the ♥A, trying to run one defender out of hearts - hopefully the defender who holds the ♦A. West plays the ♥7, an encouraging attitude signal. East continues with the ♥J, and you hold up winning the ♥A a second time. East continues with another heart and, this time, you have no choice but to win the ♥A. If the defenders' hearts were originally divided 5-3, one of the defenders now has no more hearts.

You could take the club winners, but sooner or later, you are going to need to promote a diamond winner to get to nine tricks. Let's suppose you lead a diamond now, hoping whoever wins the ♦A doesn't have any hearts remaining. East captures dummy's ♦Q with the ♦A. Unfortunately, East still has a heart to lead.

West also has a heart, so the good news is that the defenders have no more heart tricks to take and you have the rest of the tricks. The bad news is the 3NT contract is down one. You lost one spade, three hearts, and one diamond.

So let's go back to the beginning to see what you might have done.

## Recommended Play

When West leads the ♠7, it isn't necessary to try any spade finesse. You can promote the extra tricks you need in diamonds. There is no danger from the spade suit, but as you've seen, there is danger in the heart suit if the opponents attack hearts before you have driven out the ♦A.

To avoid any danger, win the first trick with the ♠A.

Now you can go about your business of developing the diamond tricks you need. You lead the ♦Q from dummy, and East wins the ♦A. The ♦K and ♦J are now established as winners.

East switches to the ♥Q, but it is too late for the defense. You can hold up the ♥A, but there's no need since you have the tricks you need. You can now take the winners you need to make the contract. You have five club winners to take, starting with the high cards from the short side. You also have two diamond winners.

The opponents have the rest of the tricks, but you've made the contract. You took **one** spade, one heart, five clubs, and two diamonds.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQT2<br>♥ 98<br>♦ Q2<br>♣ JT432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J9875<br>♥ K763<br>♦ T95<br>♣ 9</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ K6<br>♥ QJT2<br>♦ A876<br>♣ 876</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 43<br>♥ A54<br>♦ KJ43<br>♣ AKQ5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When making your plan as declarer, you can't just focus on the best play of a suit in isolation. You need to focus on the best play given the actual deal.

The best play for one or two additional tricks in spades is to first finesse the ♠10 and then finesse the ♠Q. On this deal, however, you don't need the extra tricks to come from the spade suit. You can promote them in diamonds. By winning the first trick with the ♠A, you guarantee the contract.

No need to get greedy!

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240919)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240916)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240920)

### By Date

Use the links below.