---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-04'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240904'

next:
  text: '2024-09-06'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240906'
---

# 2024-09-05

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 42<br>♥ AQ6<br>♦ AKT52<br>♣ T65</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South, playing in a team game or rubber bridge game. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. Your partner, North, is the dealer and opens 1♣. East passes, and you have to decide what to respond with this hand.

You have 13 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. That's enough to take the partnership to game once partner opens the bidding. Although you have a balanced hand, it would be premature to bid notrump without a spade stopper. You can simply start by responding in your five-card diamond suit.

West passes, and partner rebids 1♠. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Partner is showing something in both clubs and spades and you don't have a good fit for either suit. With length and strength in the other two suits, it seems notrump is the best place for the contract. Since you want to be in game, you jump right to 3NT. Neither 1NT nor a jump to 2NT would be forcing.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥J, and partner puts down the dummy. 

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ3<br>♥ K84<br>♦ Q6<br>♣ J432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 42<br>♥ AQ6<br>♦ AKT52<br>♣ T65</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You want to find the surest way to take the nine tricks needed to make the contract.

In a notrump contract, start by counting the number of immediate winners. You have two sure spade tricks, dummy's ♠A and ♠K. There are also three sure heart tricks, the ♥A, ♥K, and ♥Q. There are no sure club tricks. But you do have three certain diamond winners, the ♦A, ♦K, and That's eight immediate winners. A good start. You need only one more.

You aren't getting any more tricks from hearts, but you might be able to get an extra trick from spades with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♠Q. That's a 50% chance.

You might also get a trick from the club suit if the six missing clubs are divided 3-3 or there is a fortunate lie of the missing club honors and you guess which hand to lead from first. The chances for that are nearly 70%, but you will need to give up the lead three times. By then, the defenders may have developed enough winners to defeat the contract.

The diamond suit offers the best chance for at least one extra trick. If the six missing diamonds are divided 3-3 or the ♦J falls doubleton, you will get two extra tricks. If the diamonds are divided 4-2 and the ♦J doesn't fall doubleton, you can give up a diamond and get one extra trick. The odds of getting at least one extra trick are nearly 90%.

So it looks as though you have excellent chances for a ninth trick, and perhaps an overtrick or two.

Are there any potential problems?

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥J. With lots of entries between the combined hands, it doesn't matter where you win the first trick. You choose to win the first trick in your hand with the ♥A.

Since the most promising suit is diamonds, you start there. You play a low diamond to dummy's ♦Q, starting with the high card from the short side. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. You continue with dummy's remaining diamond and, when East follows with a low diamond, let's assume you play the ♦K. Oops! The defenders' diamonds have divided 5-1. It doesn't look as though you are getting any extra tricks from that suit.

There's still the chance of the spade finesse. You lead a low spade and, when West follows with a low spade, you finesse dummy's ♠J. More bad news. East wins the ♠Q. There goes that chance.

East returns a heart, and things look a lot gloomier. You can still try working on clubs but, by the time you get a club trick, the defenders will have developed a heart trick to defeat the contract. In fact, nothing will provide a ninth trick from this point.

That's unlucky. With the chances in diamonds and spades, the odds for making the contract were over 90%. However, there was an opportunity to ensure making the contract.

Let's go back and take another look.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥J, and you win the first trick with the ♥A. You go after your best chance for extra tricks, the diamonds. You play a low diamond to dummy's ♦Q and both defenders follow suit. You lead dummy's remaining diamond, and East follows with a low diamond. You are at the critical point in the play. How can you ensure the contract? 

You should play the ♦10!

That guarantees the contract no matter what happens next. On the actual deal, your finesse of the ♦10 wins, as West shows out. That's the ninth trick you need, despite the bad diamond split. But what if West had followed suit when you played the ♦10?

## What If?

At trick three, you lead the ♦6 from dummy. Suppose West follows with a low diamond. By playing the ♦10, not only do you have a ninth trick, you are assured of an overtrick. There are only two diamonds remaining in the opponents' hands and they will fall under the ♦A-K. You'll get all five diamond tricks and can try the spade finesse for a second overtrick.

## Another What If?

Consider this layout. But what if your finesse of the ♦10 had lost to the ♦J in West's hand?

That's okay too. Again, there are only two diamonds remaining in the opponents' hands and they will fall under the ♦A-K. You'll get four diamond tricks, enough to make the contract.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ3<br>♥ K84<br>♦ Q6<br>♣ J432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T97<br>♥ JT952<br>♦ 4<br>♣ KQ98</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q865<br>♥ 73<br>♦ J9873<br>♣ A7</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 42<br>♥ AQ6<br>♦ AKT52<br>♣ T65</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Playing the ♦10 when East follows to the second round of diamonds guarantees the contract. It is a safety play, guarding against the very distribution that occurs on this deal. If the finesse loses to West's ♦J, you have sacrificed a potential overtrick if West started with two or three diamond.

What if you are playing in a matchpoint game rather than a team or rubber bridge game?

Since you'd expect all the other North-South pairs to reach the same contract, you should forget the safety play and play diamonds from the top, hoping for as many tricks as possible. That's what the other declarers will do and you don't want to risk a bottom result when the diamonds prove to be favorable. Of course, you could get a top score if you took the finesse on the actual deal, but the odds are against the diamonds breaking 5-1. If you play the diamonds from the top and go down, everyone else will go down also.

This type of deal exemplifies the difference between matchpoint thinking and IMP thinking. You have to know the form of scoring before embarking upon a line of play.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240905)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240902)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240906)

### By Date

Use the links below.