---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-15'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240915'

next:
  text: '2024-09-17'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240917'
---

# 2024-09-16

In this deal, the opponents try to push you around. Have they pushed you too high?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ965<br>♥ 5<br>♦ 753<br>♣ K62</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South with your side vulnerable and the opponents not vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♥. Partner, North, makes a takeout double, and East raises to 4♥. You have your first chance to make a call.

After partner's takeout double, East jump to 4♥ is presumably a preemptive raise, trying to make it more difficult for you to come into the auction.

With 10 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit, you would be comfortable making an invitational advance by jumping to 2♠ or competing to 3♠. However, you have too much to let the opponents win the auction in 4♥ when partner has shown at least opening-bid values. With a singleton heart and partner presumably short in hearts also, you don't want to defend at the four level, even if you double the opponents for penalty. It seems best to compete to 4♠ since partner is showing support for all the unbid suits. You advance to 4♠, hoping partner will put down a suitable dummy.

Everyone passes and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♠ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥K, and dummy comes down with only three-card support for spades but 14 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton heart. More than enough for the takeout double.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K42<br>♥ A7<br>♦ AK842<br>♣ 763</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ965<br>♥ 5<br>♦ 753<br>♣ K62</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In planning the play in a suit contract, you start by considering the potential losers you have. There are no spade losers. You have the top four spades and are missing only four spades. There are no heart losers since dummy's ♥A will take care of the singleton heart in your hand. There are three potential club losers since the opponents hold all the high clubs other than the ♣K. There will be a diamond loser remaining after dummy's ♦A and ♦K are gone. That's a total of four potential losers: three clubs and one diamond. That's one more than you can afford. You need to look for a way to eliminate at least one of the losers.

One club loser could be avoided with the help of a finesse. You can lead from dummy toward the ♣K, hoping East holds the ♣A. That's normally a 50% chance but West opened the bidding and East made a preemptive raise, making it much more likely West holds the ♣A.

There is nothing which can done about the diamond loser. However, if the defenders' five diamonds are divided 3-2, two tricks can be established through length after giving up a trick to the defenders. The established winners could be used to discard two club losers.

When it comes to Consider the Order, it looks as though the best plan is to try to establish extra diamond winners on which to discard club losers. If that doesn't work, you can fall back on the club finesse.

Is that a good enough plan?

Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥K. Suppose you win the first trick with the ♥A and East follows with a low heart. There doesn't seem to be any reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. If their four trumps are divided 2-2, you can draw trumps in two rounds and still preserve the ♠K as an entry to dummy to reach the diamond winners once they are established. You play the ♠A and both defenders follow with low spades. So far, so good. You continue with the ♠Q. West follows with a low spade but East shows out, discarding a heart. The defenders' spades have divided 3-1 and West still has one spade remaining. 

It's probably best to leave West's trump outstanding and keep the ♠K as an entry to reach the diamonds if you can establish them. You set about establishing the extra diamond winners you need. You play a diamond to dummy's ♦K and both defenders follow with low diamonds. So far, so good. You continue with the ♦A and both defenders follow suit again. Excellent! The defenders' five diamonds have divided 3-2. There is only one diamond outstanding. You lead another round of diamonds and East wins the trick with the ♦Q as West discards a heart. Dummy's remaining two diamonds have now been established as winners and you have an entry to reach them.

Unfortunately, East is on lead and, rather than leading a heart - which you could ruff - East switches to the ♣J. Since you are fairly sure West holds the ♣A, you play a low club, hoping West will win this trick. Unfortunately, West follows with a low club. East continues with another club. You try playing a low club again, but West wins the ♣Q. West continues with the ♣A, winning the third club trick for the defense.

West leads the ♥Q, but you can ruff to win this trick. You can draw West's remaining trump with the ♠K. That puts you in dummy with the established diamond winners. Unfortunately, it's too late to use them to discard any club losers.

You have the last two tricks with the remaining trumps, but the contract is down one.

Even though the missing diamonds divided 3-2, you were unable to establish and take them before the defenders could take their club winners.

Or was there something else you could do?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥K. Before automatically winning the ♥A, you need to consider the plan and any possible danger from the opponents.

The plan is to establish extra diamond winners in dummy on which to discard club losers. Establishing the diamond suit involves giving up a trick to the opponents.

East is the dangerous opponent.

If East gains the lead before the club losers can be discarded, East can led a club and trap your ♣K.

West is the safe opponent. If West is on lead before the diamonds are established, West can't lead a club without giving you a trick with the ♣K. So you don't mind losing a trick to West, just not to East.

There won't be a problem if West holds three diamonds and East only a doubleton since West, the safe opponent, will win the third round of diamonds. But what if East started with three diamonds?

If you play the ♦A, ♦K, and a third round of diamonds, East will win. Even if you give up a diamond trick early, East is likely to win, especially if East holds the ♦Q. Is there a way to ensure if a trick must be given up to allow the diamond suit to be established, the trick is lost to West rather than East?

You can lose the first heart trick to East, the safe opponent, in exchange for the diamond trick you have to lose!

Let's see how this works.

Instead of winning the first trick, you play low from dummy, letting West's ♥K win the first trick.

You've lost a heart trick you didn't have to lose... but you are going to avoid a diamond loser in exchange!

West chooses to continue with another heart. You win the trick with dummy's ♥A and, on this trick, you discard one of your low diamonds. You now won't have to give up a diamond trick while establishing the suit.

You can afford to draw a couple of rounds of trumps. You want to keep the ♠K in dummy as an entry once you have established the diamond suit. So you play a low spade to one of the high spades in your hand. Both defenders follow with low spades, so there are only two remaining spades outstanding. You take another spade winner in your hand. West follows with a low spade but East shows out, discarding a heart. The defenders' spades have divided 3-1 and West still has a spade outstanding.

Since the ♠K is needed as an entry to dummy once the diamonds are established, you need to leave the last trump outstanding. It's time to go to work on the diamond suit. Both defenders follow with low diamonds when a diamond is led to dummy's ♦K. So far, so good. When the ♦A is played, both defenders follow suit again. That's great. The defenders diamonds have divided 3-2, so the contract is assured. A low diamond is led from dummy and East follows with the ♦Q. Since West must have no diamonds remaining you must be careful to ruff this with a high spade. West can't overruff and discards a club. Dummy's remaining two diamonds have now both been established as winners.

You can now cross to dummy with the ♠K. This accomplishes two things. It draws West's remaining trump. It gets you to where you want to be so you can take the established diamond winners. You take one of dummy's diamond winners and discard one of your club losers. You can take another diamond winner and discard a second club loser. You still have to lose a club trick to the opponents' ♣A.

You have the last two tricks with your remaining trumps. You've made the contract with an overtrick. You lost one heart trick and one club trick but no diamond tricks.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K42<br>♥ A7<br>♦ AK842<br>♣ 763</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T83<br>♥ KQT84<br>♦ J9<br>♣ AQ8</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ J9632<br>♦ QT6<br>♣ JT94</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ965<br>♥ 5<br>♦ 753<br>♣ K62</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You did well in the auction to compete to 4♠. The opponents would be defeated only one trick in their 4♥ contract. Even if you doubled them, it wouldn't be much compensation for the game you could make.

Declarer's plan on this deal is an exercise in avoidance play. East is the dangerous opponent since West likely holds the ♣A. If a trick must be lost, you would rather lose it to West, the safe opponent. With East holding three diamonds, including the ♦Q, you can't avoid losing a diamond trick to East by giving up a trick in the suit.

West's opening lead, however, gives you the opportunity to exchange one loser for another. You lose a heart trick to West - the safe opponent - but that allows you to avoid losing a diamond trick to East - the dangerous opponent. You are now able to establish the diamond suit without losing a trick to either defender.

You must still handle the entries carefully, keeping a entry to dummy to reach the established diamond winners. For all this work, you are rewarded with an overtrick rather than being defeated one trick.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240916)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240914)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240919)

### By Date

Use the links below.