---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-15'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240815'

next:
  text: '2024-08-17'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240817'
---

# 2024-08-16

On this deal, the opponents get off to a fast start. Can you avoid losing any more tricks?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ T52<br>♥️ AQ83<br>♦️ J7<br>♣️ J963</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South, and both sides are vulnerable. Partner, North, opens 1♦️. East makes a takeout double. You have to decide what to do after this start.

You have 8 high-card points. That's not enough to redouble, which would show about 10 or more high-card points. Instead, you can simply bid your heart suit, just as you would if East had passed. You don't want the partnership to lose a possible heart fit.

West passes, and partner makes a jump raise right to 4♥️. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Partner's jump raise to game shows four-card support for hearts and a maximum-strength one-level opening bid of about 19-21 points. With only 8 points, including a couple of jacks, you don't have enough to consider bidding any higher.

West passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♥️.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦️</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>1♥️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥️</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠️Q, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ 863<br>♥️ KT54<br>♦️ AKQT<br>♣️ AK</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ T52<br>♥️ AQ83<br>♦️ J7<br>♣️ J963</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You need to find a way to take ten tricks. Partner has 19 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton club, about what you might expect. You start by making a plan. How many potential losers do you have in 4♥️?

You won't have any trump losers if the five missing hearts are divided 3-2, as you would usually expect. Even if the hearts divide 4-1, the ♥️J might be singleton or you have finessing possibilities. You have three potential spade losers, and it looks as though you are about to lose those right away since West has led a spade. You don't have any diamond losers. In clubs, you will be left with two potential losers after dummy's ♣️A and ♣️K are gone. So, assuming you don't have a heart loser, you have five losers: three spades and two clubs. Since West has led a spade, it doesn't look like you can avoid the three spade losers, but you can discard both the club losers on dummy's extra diamond winners once trumps are drawn. So are there any potential problems?

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠️Q. It wins the trick as East makes an encouraging attitude signal with the ♠️9. West continues with the ♠️J as East finishes the encouraging high-low signal by playing the ♠️4. West plays a third spade, and East wins this trick with the ♠️K. You have lost the first three tricks. You can't afford to lose any more. East switches to a low club, and you win a trick with dummy's ♣️K.

You are at the critical point in the play. You want to draw the defenders' trumps so they cannot ruff your remaining club or diamond winners. If the five missing hearts are divided 3-2, which you would normally expect, you could simply play the three top honors in your combined hands. You will then have the rest of the tricks and make your
contract easily. 

Suppose you start with dummy's ♥️K. Both defenders follow with low hearts. You continue with the ♥️10 and East follows with a low heart. Should you play a low heart now?

It wouldn't look good if the defenders' hearts are divided 3-2 and West started with the ♥️J. So let's assume you win with the ♥️Q in your hand. West, however, shows out on this trick and discards a low diamond. East has started with four hearts, the ♥️J-9-7-6.

There's not much you can do now. You can draw another trump with the ♥️ A, but East now has a remaining heart that is higher than your ♥️8. 4♥️ is down one, losing three spades and a heart.

Were there any warning signs that there might be a potential problem with the heart suit?

Let's take another look.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠️Q and wins the first trick. At trick two, West takes the ♠️J, and then leads a low spade to East's ♠️K for a third winner. East returns a club, and you finally get to win a trick with dummy's K. What now?

Even though the defenders have taken the first three tricks, it may looks as though the contract is secure. With all the top trumps, you can discard two club losers on dummy's extra diamonds once trumps are drawn. But is there a potential danger?

The only danger is a bad heart break. If West has four hearts, you should be fine. If you play the ♥️A and ♥️Q and East shows out, you can finesse dummy's ♥️10, trapping West's ♥️J. Is it likely West holds four hearts?

No!

East made a takeout double during the auction, showing support for the unbid suits. If either defender has length in hearts, it is much more likely to be East than West. If East holds four hearts including the ♥️J, there's no point in starting with a low heart to an honor in your hand.

Instead, you can start with dummy's ♥️K in case West started with a
singleton ♥️J or even ♥️9.

Let's see how the play should go. Both defenders follow with low hearts. Let's suppose you now lead the ♥️10 from dummy. East again plays a low heart. At least you are correct in your assumption that East would not be the one with a singleton heart. But what should you play from your hand?

Playing low will be the winning play if East did start with four hearts. It will also be okay if East started with three hearts including the ♥️J. How convinced are you that East holds the ♥️J? Do you have any clues other than East's takeout double?

Yes.

West has already shown up with the ♠️Q and ♠️J. That leaves only the ♠️A, ♠️K, ♥️J, and ♣️J as high cards East might hold. From the first three tricks, it's clear that East holds the ♠️A-K. If East also holds the ♣️Q, that's only 9 high-card points. If East has the ♥️J, that's still only 10 high-card points, a borderline takeout double, vulnerable, even if East is short in diamonds. So all the clues point to East holding at least three hearts, and likely four, including the ♥️J.

So you should rely on your detective work and play a low heart!

West shows out on this trick, discarding a diamond. Your detective work has paid off! The rest is easy. You can draw another of East's hearts with the ♥️Q. The ♥️A takes care of East's last heart, the ♥️J. Now that the trumps are all gone, it's safe to start taking your remaining winners, starting with the ♦️J. Dummy's diamonds and clubs will take the rest of the tricks.

You've made the 4♥️ contract, losing only three spade tricks and **no**
heart tricks.

## Summary

Here's the full deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ 863<br>♥️ KT54<br>♦️ AKQT<br>♣️ AK</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ QJ7<br>♥️ 2<br>♦️ 965432<br>♣️ 742</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ AK94<br>♥️ J976<br>♦️ 8<br>♣️ QT85</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ T52<br>♥️ AQ83<br>♦️ J7<br>♣️ J963</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

East does have the perfect shape for a takeout double. East can count 10 high-card points plus 3 dummy points for the singleton diamond. That's barely enough, vulnerable. If you start hearts by leading the ♥️A or ♥️Q, you can no longer avoid losing a heart trick. Similarly, if you start with the ♥️K and then play the ♥️A or ♥️Q, you will have to lose a trick to East's remaining ♥️J-9.

East did well not to cover the ♥️10 with the ♥️J when you led the ♥️10 from dummy. If East had covered, you would win the ♥️Q and know what to do when West showed out. You would cross back to dummy and lead another heart, trapping East's ♥️9 with your ♥️A-8. East put you to the test by playing low.

What if East had doubled with three low hearts and West won the ♥️J on the second round of hearts?

You shouldn't be concerned. You made an excellent play based on the available clues that should work much more often than it loses. You have to back your judgment in such situations, even if it occasionally lets you down.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240816)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240815)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240816#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.