---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-26'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240826'

next: false
---

# 2024-08-27

In today's deal, will you start the defense off the right way?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJ95<br>♥ A43<br>♦ T95<br>♣ QJT</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 1♠. You have to decide what call to make.

With a balanced hand and only 10 high-card points, you have no reason to come into the auction.

West responds 1NT. Your partner, North, passes, and East rebids 2♥. The auction is back to you.

You have no reason to do anything except pass at this point.

West raises to 3♥. Partner passes, and East continues to 4♥. It's your turn again to make a call.

You have nothing to say.

West and partner both pass, ending the auction. You must now choose an opening lead against East's 4♥ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

You face a critical challenge right away. You have to choose an opening lead. 

Typically, when you are on lead against a suit contract and have no shortness, you look to lead an unbid suit, preferably one in which you have a suitable sequence.

Here, you have two unbid suits and sequences in both of them. With stronger clubs than diamonds, it would seem reasonable to start with the ♣Q.

Let's see what will happen on this deal if you lead the ♣Q. Suppose you lead the ♣Q. West puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 2<br>♥ KT87<br>♦ AJ843<br>♣ 985</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QJ95<br>♥ A43<br>♦ T95<br>♣ QJT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

West has only 8 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the five-card diamond suit. However, West's hand improved when East showed a four-card or longer heart suit.

A low club is played from dummy, partner plays a low club, and declarer wins the ♣K. It looks as though declarer holds both the ♣A and ♣K, but you may be able to establish a third-round winner in the suit. Declarer plays a low diamond to dummy's ♦A. A low spade is led from dummy and partner wins the ♠A as declarer and you follow with low spades.

Partner leads back a club, and declarer wins the ♣A. Your ♣J has now been promoted into a winner. However, declarer takes a trick with the ♠K, discarding dummy's remaining club.

Declarer ruffs a spade in dummy as you and partner follow suit. A diamond is led from dummy. Partner plays the ♦Q, but declarer ruffs. Declarer started with a singleton diamond. So much for any diamond tricks for the defense. Declarer now leads a club and ruffs it in dummy. So much for any club tricks for the defense. Declarer ruffs another diamond as both you and partner follow suit. Declarer ruffs another spade in dummy.

Declarer leads dummy's ♥K, and you win the ♥A. With nothing left but trumps, you lead a heart and declarer wins the ♥Q. Declarer's last card is a spade winner, but you can ruff with your last trump.

A bit surprisingly, you ended up taking two heart tricks on this deal. However, together with partner's ♠A, that's only three tricks. Declarer has made the 4♥ contract.

With declarer holding a singleton diamond and the ♠A located favorably for declarer, was there anything you could have done to defeat the contract?

Let's go back to trick one.

## Recommended Defense

While it seems reasonable to lead from the solid sequence in clubs, before doing so, you need to consider the information you have from the auction. What do you expect dummy to look like?

East bid spades and hearts and West raised hearts rather than spades. You would expect dummy to have four or more hearts and at most one or two spades. With three spades, West would likely have raised spades right away. Looking at the spade holding in your hand, what do you expect declarer is likely to do?

Declarer will have some potential spade losers and will presumably want to ruff them in dummy. What can you do to make that more challenging for declarer?

Lead a trump!

That will reduce dummy's potential for ruffing spades. You generally don't want to lead trumps since that is declarer's suit. However, there is an exception when declarer is likely to want to ruff losers in dummy.

Having decided to lead a trump, which one should you lead?

A low trump.

Although you aren't supposed to lead away from an ace against a suit contract, that doesn't apply to the trump suit. The advantage of leading a low heart is that it may leave a trump in partner's hand to lead back if partner gains the lead. Also, by retaining the ace, you will have an opportunity to regain the lead in case you need to lead some other suit.

So let's see what will happen if you start off by leading a low trump. West puts down the dummy and, as you predicted from the auction, West has good heart support but only a singleton spade.

Declarer wins the first trick with dummy's ♥7 as partner and declarer follow with low hearts. Declarer leads dummy's singleton spade, and partner wins the ♠A.

Because you led a low heart at trick one, partner has a heart remaining to lead and remove more of the opponents' trumps. You win the ♥A. You can now lead a third round of trumps. Declarer wins as partner discards a low club. There is now only one trump left in dummy and one in declarer's hand.

Declarer takes a trick with the ♠K, discarding a club from dummy as both you and partner follow with low spades. Declarer leads a diamond to dummy's ♦A. Declarer then ruffs a diamond. That's declarer's last trump. Declarer next ruffs a spade in dummy. There goes dummy's last trump. Your ♠Q has now become a winner. Declarer leads a club from dummy and wins the ♣K. Declarer now leads a spade, and you win the ♠Q.

You lead a club, and declarer wins the ♣A. With no trumps left, your ♣J is now a winner.

Declarer takes a trick with an established spade winner. Declarer is still left with a club which you win. That's the fourth trick for the defense, defeating the 4♥ contract. You got only one heart trick, but your side also got two spade tricks and a club.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A84<br>♥ 62<br>♦ KQ72<br>♣ 7432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 2<br>♥ KT87<br>♦ AJ843<br>♣ 985</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KT763<br>♥ QJ95<br>♦ 6<br>♣ AK6</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QJ95<br>♥ A43<br>♦ T95<br>♣ QJT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The saying "when in doubt, lead trump" is not usually good advice. The time to lead trump is when you aren't in doubt. You know it is likely to be the best lead against the opponents' contract.

This deal is an example of when you should lead a trump. You can tell from the auction that dummy will be short in spades. You want to prevent declarer from ruffing spade losers in the dummy.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240827)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240820)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240827#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.