---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-17'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240817'

next:
  text: '2024-08-19'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240819'
---

# 2024-08-18

Today's column looks at using a negative double in less than ideal circumstances.

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

After partner opens a suit and the next opponent overcalls in a suit, a double by responder is a negative double. In an ideal world, responder always has at least four cards in both the unbid suits. Most partnerships play negative doubles up to and including 3♠ overcalls. Some partnerships play negative doubles through even higher levels.

When considering making a negative double, responder must keep three questions in mind:

- Do I have the right distribution for a negative double?
- Do I have enough strength to make a negative double?
- Is there a more descriptive bid I can make?

While having four cards in both unbid suits is ideal, the emphasis should be to show support for the unbid major or majors. No one lives in an ideal world, however, and responder will sometimes have to double with imperfect distribution.

Consider this South hand. 

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 872<br>♥ KJ95<br>♦ A873<br>♣ 42</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens the bidding 1♦, and East overcalls 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has 7 high-card points, enough to compete after East's 1♠ overcall. South would prefer to have at least four hearts and four clubs to make a negative double, but doubling with this distribution is acceptable. Finding an eight-card major-suit fit is South's priority, and the double allows North to bid hearts with four cards in that suit. If North bids clubs, South is prepared to take a preference back to diamonds.

Consider the same South hand with the heart and club suits switched.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 872<br>♥ 42<br>♦ A873<br>♣ KJ95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

The auction begins the same way: North opens 1♦, and East overcalls 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South must consider what call to make.

This hand lacks four hearts for a negative double. While responder can usually get away with making a negative double without support for an unbid minor, it is dangerous to mislead opener about major-suit length. Instead, responder can raise to 2◆. It's uncertain North-South have an eight-card fit in diamonds. North's distribution could be 4=4=3=2, but that happens only 5% of the time.

Suppose there are two unbid major suits? Does responder promise four cards in both majors for a negative double?

Take this South hand, for example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ63<br>♥ 72<br>♦ KT43<br>♣ 865</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♣, and East overcalls 1♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Some pairs have different agreements but, playing standard methods, a negative double on this auction would show at least four cards in both majors. With length in only one major, responder can conveniently bid it at the one level.

With this hand, for example, South has an easy 1♠ bid. South does not need to be tempted to make a negative double without the appropriate distribution.

Other auctions with two unbid majors may not be as convenient for responder. Without the strength and distribution to bid a major, responder may have to make a negative double with less than ideal distribution.

Picture South with this hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJ5<br>♥ AJ72<br>♦ K86<br>♣ T52</td>
	</tr>
</table>

West passes, North opens the bidding with 1♦, and East overcalls 2♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Introducing a new suit at the two level after an overcall is a different story. South would need five or more hearts to bid 2♥. Lacking a fifth heart, South has to make an imperfect negative double. South hopes to hear a heart bid from North. If North bids spades, South will hope to survive the subsequent auction.

The minimum strength required for a negative double depends on the level of the overcall.

At the one-level, responder can make a negative double with around 6 or more points - the same that opener would expect as a minimum for a one-level response.

Take this South hand, for instance.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT73<br>♥ 872<br>♦ JT82<br>♣ K5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♣, and East overcalls 1♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If East passed, South would respond 1♦ or 1♠ depending on the partnership style. North-South could have an eight-card fit in spades, diamonds, or clubs, and there might even be game if North has a maximum opening of about 19-21 points.

The overcall should not dissuade South from getting into the auction. A negative double shows South's spade length and some values. After doubling, South will not need to take any further unforced action.

At higher levels, responder needs extra strength to make a negative double. Doubling forces opener to take another bid, even with a bare minimum, which would be risky if responder had only 6 or 7 points.

Here is a slightly stronger hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ73<br>♥ A52<br>♦ 976<br>♣ T93</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♦, and East bids 2♥, a weak jump overcall.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Is this hand strong enough to make a negative double at this level?

Yes, but barely. There is no guarantee North-South have an eight-card fit in any suit. After a negative double by South, North will have to bid at the two- or three-level.

A negative double at this level requires about 8 points or more. With 8 points opposite North's minimum of 12 or 13 points, at least North-South will not end up in a weak trump fit with less strength than East-West.

Let's go higher still.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 84<br>♥ KJ63<br>♦ AT54<br>♣ 632</td>
	</tr>
</table>

West passes as dealer, North opens 1♣, and East overcalls 3♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With only 8 points, South does not have enough strength to make a negative double of 3♠ - that would show around 10 points or more. If North has four hearts, there will be an eight-card fit but, unless North has around 16 points or more, 4 will probably be too high. If there is no eight-card fit, things could be even worse.

South can pass, hoping to defeat 3♠ if West and North also pass.

In addition to having too little strength or the wrong distribution for a negative double, responder might also reject a double in favor of a more descriptive bid.

Here is a possible hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ732<br>♥ T3<br>♦ Q5<br>♣ Q874</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♦, and East overcalls 1♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has length in both unbid suits and enough values to act at this level, but a negative double is not the best call. This auction is a special case when a negative double would show exactly four cards in the unbid major. A 1♠ response instead shows the same strength, typically with five spades or more. Showing the fifth spade is more valuable than suggesting length in clubs. Lacking spade support but having four clubs, North may bid 2♣ over 1♠, allowing the partnership to find its club fit.

Let's change the auction slightly.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K3<br>♥ KJ982<br>♦ 75<br>♣ T964</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Here, North opens 1♠ and East overcalls 2♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>3♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South must decide whether to bid the heart suit or make a negative double.

South would like to show the five-card heart suit immediately, but bidding a new suit at the two-level shows about 11 or more points. South has only 7 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. Pass is a possible call for South, but 8 points are enough to make a two-level negative double. There may be an eight-card or longer fit in hearts or clubs and, if there is, a negative double will uncover it.

Here is one final hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJ953<br>♥ K8<br>♦ AJ82<br>♣ 43</td>
	</tr>
</table>

West deals and passes. North opens 1♣, and East bids 2♥, a weak
jump overcall.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As before, South has length in both unbid suits. Negative double or 2♠?

South has 12 points - 11 high-card points plus 1 length point. That is enough to bid 2♠. Looking for a diamond fit can wait. The priority is to find an eight-card major-suit fit. If South does not bid 2♠ now, South may never be able to find a 5-3 spade fit.

# Summary

The negative double is a great convention. Knowing when to make a negative double in less than ideal circumstances - and, just as importantly, when not to make one - will help you get the most mileage out of the convention.

## Questions

### 01

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT72<br>♥ 954<br>♦ Q953<br>♣ T6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Double

This hand has the classic shape for a negative double: four-card support for both the unbid suits. 6 points are sufficient for a negative double at the one level, but you should not double with less.

### 02

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A8<br>♥ QJT52<br>♦ K973<br>♣ 54</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

2♥

Responder's priority is to show the five-card heart suit, provided you have enough values to bid at the two level. You have 11 points - 10 high-card points plus 1 length point for the fifth heart - which is the minimum needed to bid 2♥.

### 03

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ43<br>♥ 92<br>♦ K82<br>♣ JT95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Pass

You have ideal shape for a negative double but not enough strength. A negative double at the three level shows around 10 or more points. If you double, the partnership could easily get too high-maybe on a misfitting deal.

### 04

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A2<br>♥ QJ75<br>♦ 763<br>♣ J832</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

1♥

This is a special case where a negative double would show four cards in both unbid majors playing standard methods. With length in only one major, as with this hand, you bid the major. A 1♥ response on this auction shows a four-card or longer suit.

### 05

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, and North-South are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQJ3<br>♥ A93<br>♦ 742<br>♣ J95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Double

You would like to have four-card support in both majors to make a negative double in this auction, but sometimes you have no good choice but to make a negative double without four cards in both majors. With this hand, there is no good alternative to doubling, because you have too many points to pass, and 2♠ would show five or more spades.

### 06

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J973<br>♥ A54<br>♦ 32<br>♣ K862</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Double

In a perfect world, you would wait for four cards in both unbid suits before making a negative double. In real life, however, you can make a negative double without length in an unbid minor. If North bids diamonds after your double, you can take a preference back to clubs. 

### 07

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q732<br>♥ KT94<br>♦ K3<br>♣ 965</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Double

The minimum for a two-level negative double is about 8 points, because opener is forced to act at the two level or higher over responder's double. You have 8 points and perfect distribution for a negative double, four cards in both unbid suits.

### 08

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K9754<br>♥ A3<br>♦ 86<br>♣ T732</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

1♠

A negative double here shows 6 or more points with exactly four spades. With five or more spades, South should respond 1♠. On most auctions, responder's negative double can include five cards in an unbid major. This auction is the exception because it is possible to distinguish between four or five spades at the one level.

### 09

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 72<br>♥ QJ6<br>♦ J852<br>♣ KT93</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

2♣

You have the values for a negative double, but doubling without length in the unbid major is asking for trouble. A reasonable alternative is to simply raise to 2♣. Although North might occasionally have only three clubs, a raise to 2♣ just promises four-card support. Playing in a seven-card fit at the two level may be the best contract for your side.

### 10

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ643<br>♥ 83<br>♦ J2<br>♣ Q984</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

Double

It is important to get spades into the picture, but you need at least 11 points to bid 2♠. With only 9 points - 8 high-card points, plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit - you can make a negative double instead.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240818)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240814)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240821)

### By Date

Use the links below.