---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-22'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240922'

next: false
---

# 2024-09-23

In this deal, can you find the two extra winners you need?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A764<br>♥ AK63<br>♦ Q9<br>♣ K85</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South with both sides vulnerable. As the dealer, you have the first opportunity to open the bidding.

There are 16 high-card points and the hand is balanced. It falls in the middle of the 15-17 range for an opening bid of 1NT.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 1NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠K. Dummy comes down with a balanced hand and 7 high-card points.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T32<br>♥ 842<br>♦ KT83<br>♣ A76</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A764<br>♥ AK63<br>♦ Q9<br>♣ K85</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You need seven tricks in 1NT.

In a notrump contract, begin making a plan by counting the sure winners you have. You start with one spade winner, the ♠A. You start with two sure heart winners, the ♥A and ♥K. There are also two sure club winners, dummy's ♣A and your ♣K. You don't start with any sure diamond winners since the opponents hold the ♦A. That's a total of five sure winners: one spade, two hearts, and two clubs. Two more winners are needed to make the 1NT contract.

You might get one extra winner through length in spades if the defenders' six spades divide exactly 3-3. That's against the odds. Also, West has led a spade and presumably has a four-card or longer suit.

You might also get an extra trick through length in hearts if the six missing hearts divide 3-3. Again, that is against the odds.

The diamond suit offers the chance to establish two extra winners through promotion by driving out the defenders' ♦A and ♦J. You also have an entry to dummy's established winners with the ♣A.

So it looks as though you can establish all the tricks you need with the help of the diamond suit.

Are there any other considerations?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠K. A low spade is played from dummy and East follows with a low spade. It can't hurt to hold up winning this trick since it might disrupt the defenders' communications. You play a low spade and West's ♠K wins the first trick. West continues with the ♠Q. A low spade is played from dummy and East follows with the ♠9. There doesn't seem much point in holding up a second time since West started with at most four spades. You win the ♠A.

Time to start establishing the diamond winners you need. Suppose you start with the ♦Q, high card from the short side. A little surprisingly, this wins the trick as the defenders hold up winning their ♦A. You continue with your remaining diamond. West plays low and you choose to play low from dummy, hoping West holds the ♦J and East will be forced to win the ♦A.

Unfortunately, East wins the ♦J. East leads a club and you choose to win with dummy's ♣A.

You could lead a diamond to drive out the defenders' ♦A, but you have no entry left to reach the established winners. It looks best to try to establish an extra winner in hearts, even though it is against the odds. You lead a heart to the ♥K as both defenders follow suit. So far so good. You continue with the ♥A and both defenders follow again. Maybe the hearts are going to divide favorably. When you lead a third round of hearts, however, West wins as East shows out, discarding a diamond. The hearts have divided 4-2, as might be expected.

West has another heart winner to take. West takes a trick with the ♠J as East shows out, discarding another diamond. West, as expected, started with four spades. West has another spade winner to take. West leads a club. East plays the ♣Q and you win the ♣K.

West has the last trick with the ♣J and the contract is down one.

It was unfortunate the defenders held up their ♦A so you couldn't establish two winners in the suit. When the hearts didn't break 3-3, you couldn't establish a seventh winner there either. Could you have handled things differently?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠K and you choose to hold up winning the first trick. West continues with the ♠Q and you choose to win this trick with the ♠A as East follows with the ♠9.

You need to establish two diamond winners by driving out the ♦A and ♦J.
If you start with the ♦Q, however, the defenders may hold up the ♦A. Unless West holds the ♦J, you now won't be able to establish a second winner since there is only one entry to dummy. How can you get around this problem?

You can start by leading the ♦9!

This goes against the principle of leading the high card from the short side, but let's see why it helps with this particular card combination.

When West follows with a low diamond, you play a low diamond from dummy. If West holds the ♦J, East will either have to let this trick win or win with the ♦A. In either case, you will be able to establish a second diamond trick.

What if East holds the ♦J?

It won't do East any good to hold up winning the ♦J. You will then have one diamond winner and be able to promote a second while you still have an entry to dummy. So East chooses to win the ♦J.

East leads a club and you are careful to win with the ♣K, keeping the ♣A as an entry to dummy. You now lead the ♦Q and West follows with another low diamond. Again, you need to be careful. If you play low from dummy, East might hold up the ♦A and you won't be able to establish a second trick in the suit.

Instead, you overtake the ♦Q with the dummy's ♦K!

Now it won't do East any good to hold up the ♦A since you will be in the right place to continue leading the suit. East chooses to win the ♦A.

East switches to the ♥Q and you win the ♥K.

You can cross to dummy with the carefully-preserved ♣A. You can now take the two diamond winners you worked so hard to promote. You have the ♥A as your seventh trick.

The defenders have the last three tricks, but you have made the contract. You took one spade, two hearts, two clubs, and two diamond tricks.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T32<br>♥ 842<br>♦ KT83<br>♣ A76</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQJ8<br>♥ J975<br>♦ 74<br>♣ J93</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 95<br>♥ QT<br>♦ AJ652<br>♣ QT42</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A764<br>♥ AK63<br>♦ Q9<br>♣ K85</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, you need to promote two diamond winners by driving out the defenders' ♦A and ♦J. If you start by leading the ♦Q, East can defeat the contract by holding up with the ♦A. Now you don't have enough entries to dummy to establish the suit. By starting with the ♦9, you can guarantee establishing two diamond winners. If West holds the ♦J, there will be no problem. Even if East holds the ♦J, there will still be no problem. It won't do any good for East to refuse winning the ♦J since that will give you one trick and you can promote a second by continuing with the ♦Q.

After East wins the ♦J, you must still be careful. You need to preserve the ♣A as an entry to dummy's diamonds, and you also need to overtake the ♦Q with the ♦K so you can promote the diamond winners you need. With this suit combination in diamonds and the limited entries to dummy, you need to play everything in exactly the right order.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/20240923)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240921)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202409)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240923#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.