---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240812'

next:
  text: '2024-08-14'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/20240814'
---

# 2024-08-13

In today's deal, will partner know what to do?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ T82<br>♥️ Q9763<br>♦️ AQ93<br>♣️ 3</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 1NT, showing 15-17 points and a balanced hand. You have to decide what to do in second position.

There are 8 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. You might overcall at the one level, but neither the hand nor the suit is good enough to come in at the two level over a strong 1NT opening, especially when vulnerable.

West raises to 3NT. Your partner, North, passes and so does East. The auction is back to you.

Naturally, you pass and must now make the opening lead against East's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

You don't have a lot of information from the auction, so the standard opening lead is fourth best from the longest and strongest suit. With this hand, there's no reason to lead anything other than the ♥️6. You have potential entries in diamonds to help establish the suit and regain the lead.

## Possible Defense

So you lead the ♥️6 and West puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ A6<br>♥️ 85<br>♦️ 875<br>♣️ AJT875</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ <br>♥️ <br>♦️ <br>♣️ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ T82<br>♥️ Q9763<br>♦️ AQ93<br>♣️ 3</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

A low heart is played from dummy, partner plays the ♥️10, and declarer wins the ♥️J. That's not a good start. What do you know about declarer's heart holding?

Since partner would presumably have played third hand high when holding either the ♥️A or ♥️K, it looks as though declarer holds the ♥️A-K-J. That means declarer has two more heart stoppers. Looking at the long club suit in dummy, establishing winners in hearts before declarer has at least nine tricks looks extremely doubtful.

Declarer starts establishing the club suit by taking a trick with the ♣️K. Both you and partner follow with low clubs. Declarer leads another club. You are at the critical point in the defense. What are you playing to this trick?

The heart lead hasn't worked out very well and, looking at dummy's club suit and the ♠️A, it appears the best chance for your side is if partner can gain the lead and switch to a diamond. How can you send that message to partner?

How about discarding a low spade as a discouraging attitude signal, telling partner you have no interest in that suit?

Let's see what will happen if you do. Suppose you discard a low spade. Declarer plays dummy's ♣️10, and partner wins the ♣️Q. That's good news. Partner has the lead. Now, if partner leads a diamond...

Unfortunately, partner leads a heart, returning your original suit. Declarer wins the ♥️K. Declarer has at least nine tricks now: a spade, three hearts, and five clubs.

So, making a discouraging signal in spades didn't get partner to
switch to diamonds. Partner still assumed you wanted your original suit returned. Perhaps you started with ♥️A-Q-9-6-3 and returning a heart was the only way to defeat the contract.

Let's go back and try again. You lead the ♥️6, a low heart is played from dummy, partner plays the ♥️10, and declarer wins with the ♥️J. Declarer takes a trick with the ♣️K as you and partner follow with low clubs. Declarer leads another club toward dummy. Playing a low spade didn't get the message to partner to lead a diamond. How about giving an encouraging attitude signal in diamonds?

Let's see how that works on this deal. Suppose you play the ♦️9 as an encouraging attitude signal. Declarer plays dummy's ♣️10, and partner wins the ♣️Q. This time, partner gets the message. Partner shifts to the ♦️2. Declarer plays a low diamond, and you win with the ♦️Q. Since the diamond suit is the only suit that can give the defense enough tricks to defeat the contract, you continue with the ♦️A. Dummy and partner follow with low diamonds and declarer with the ♦️10. You continue with your last diamond suit and partner wins the trick with the ♦️K as declarer follows with the ♦️J. Unfortunately, partner has no more diamonds to lead and switches back to hearts. Declarer wins and has the rest of the tricks.

That was better. You got partner to switch to a diamond and took three diamond tricks. However, that wasn't enough to defeat the contract. Your side took four tricks, so declarer made the 3NT contract.

Let's go back and try once more.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♥️6, fourth best from your longest and strongest suit, and declarer wins with the ♥️J. Declarer starts working on the club suit by playing the ️♣️K. Declarer leads another club toward dummy, and you have to find a way to send the message to partner to switch to a diamond if partner gains the lead. Playing a low spade won't work, and you may not be able to afford a high diamond if partner holds only three diamonds. What's left?

Discard one of your hearts!

You wouldn't be discarding from the suit you led if you wanted partner to lead the suit back so you could take or establish winners in the suit.

Declarer plays dummy's ♣️10, and partner wins the ♣️Q. Since partner knows you don't have heart winners ready to take and partner can see the ♠️A in dummy, partner switches to a low diamond. Declarer plays the◆10, and you win the ♦️Q. That's better, you got partner to lead the suit you wanted. Now what?

You lead back a low diamond!

You don't want to block the diamond suit by playing the ♦️A if partner has only three diamonds. Partner has shown a diamond honor by leading the ♦️2 rather than a high diamond, top of nothing. And declarer would have tried the ♦️K if declarer started with a doubleton ♦️K.

As you hoped, partner wins the trick with the ♦️K. Partner leads another diamond, declarer plays the ♦️J, and you win the ♦️A. With all the other diamonds gone, your◆9 is a winner. That's the fifth trick for the defense.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but you have defeated the contract. Your side took a club and **four** diamond tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ Q975<br>♥️ T42<br>♦️ K62<br>♣️ Q94</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠️ A6<br>♥️ 85<br>♦️ 875<br>♣️ AJT875</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠️ KJ43<br>♥️ AKJ<br>♦️ JT4<br>♣️ K62</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠️ T82<br>♥️ Q9763<br>♦️ AQ93<br>♣️ 3</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, discarding a low spade will still leave partner with a dilemma about what to lead, and partner will usually return your original suit. Making an encouraging attitude signal in diamonds would be clear cut, but you can't afford to discard a diamond. That's the setting trick. So that leaves discarding a card in the suit you led originally. Hopefully, partner will get the message that you are no longer interested in that suit.

## Links

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240806)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/202408)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/20240813#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.