---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-01'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/01'

next:
  text: '2024-12-03'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/03'
---

# 2024-12-02

In this deal, can you improve your chances?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJT862<br>♥ 86<br>♦ K94<br>♣ AJ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East and West are vulnerable and your side is not. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♣. East passes. You must decide on a response.

With 12 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit, there is enough strength to take the partnership to game once partner opens the bidding. The priority, however, is to first decide Where the partnership belongs. You start by making a forcing response in the six-card spade suit at the one level.

West passes. North raises to 2♠, and East passes. You have an opportunity to make a second call.

Partner's raise shows three-card or longer support for spades and a minimum-strength opening bid of about 12 to 16 points. Having found Where the partnership belongs, you can now take the partnership to game in spades, 4♠.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are the declarer in 4♠ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥Q. Dummy comes down with four-card spade support and 13 high-card points.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ75<br>♥ A93<br>♦ 752<br>♣ K84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJT862<br>♥ 86<br>♦ K94<br>♣ AJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In 4♠, you can afford to lose only three tricks.

In a suit contract, begin by counting the potential losers. There will be no spade losers. You are missing only three low spades. There will be a heart loser remaining once dummy's ♥A is gone. There are no club losers. Dummy's ♣K will take care of the ♣J in your hand. There are three potential diamond losers since the defenders hold all the high diamonds other than the ♦K. That's a total of four losers: one heart and three diamonds. You will need to eliminate one of the losers if you are to make the contract.

You can't do anything about the heart loser.

In diamonds, you can hope to avoid the loser with the help of a finesse. You can lead a diamond from dummy, hoping East holds the ♦K. That's a 50% chance. Will that be good enough?

Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥Q.

There doesn't seem to be any reason to hold up winning this trick, so you win the ♥A as East makes an encouraging attitude signal with the ♥10. No reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. You lead a low spade to the ♠K. Both defenders follow with low spades. There is only one more spade outstanding. You lead a low spade to dummy's ♠A. West follows with the defenders' last spade as East discards a heart.

There doesn't seem much reason to delay trying the diamond finesse. You are in the right place to lead a low diamond from dummy. When East follows with the ♦10, you try the ♦K. Unfortunately, this loses to West's ♦A.

West leads a heart and East wins the ♥K. East takes a trick with the ♦Q. East takes another trick with the ♦J. That's the fourth trick for the defense.

East leads a heart and you ruff. You have the rest of the tricks, but the contract has gone down.

With West holding three diamonds including the ♦A, the diamond finesse was doomed to failure. Was there an alternative?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥Q.

You have your first decision on whether to win the ♥A or hold up winning for one round since you have to lose a heart trick anyway.

If West holds the ♦A, it's important to win the ♥A. If you hold up, East may overtake and switch to a diamond, trapping your ♦K. So you win the first trick as East makes an encouraging attitude signal with the ♥10.

Although you have the 50% chance East holds the ♦A, there is another possible finesse. You can take a finesse in clubs, hoping East holds the ♣Q. If the finesse works, you will create an extra club winner on which you can discard one of the diamond losers.

By starting with the club finesse, you get to combine the chances.

If the club finesse works, you don't need the diamond finesse - although you can then try it for an overtrick. If the club finesse loses, you will still have the chance of the diamond finesse since you can discard one of the diamond losers on the extra club winner.

Let's see how the play should go. You can afford to draw trumps first. Since you want to end up in dummy, you start by taking a trick with the ♠K. Both defenders follow with low spades. You cross over to dummy with the ♠A, drawing the defenders' last trump at the same time.

You are now in the right place to try the club finesse. You lead a low club and, when East follows with a low club, you finesse the ♣J. Success! The club finesse wins. East must hold the ♣Q. You take a trick with the ♣A. You can cross to dummy with a spade. On the ♣K, you discard one of the losers. You choose to discard a diamond loser.

With the contract now secure, you can now try for an overtrick. You lead a diamond from dummy and, when East plays the ♦10, you try the ♦K. West, however, wins the ♦A. So much for the overtrick.

The defenders can take their established heart winner. They can also take a second diamond trick. When they play a third round of diamonds, you ruff, having discarded a diamond loser.

You have the rest of the tricks with the remaining trumps and have made the contract. You lost a heart trick and two diamond tricks, but that's all. Even though West held the ♦A, you were able to eliminate your third diamond loser.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ75<br>♥ A93<br>♦ 752<br>♣ K84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 93<br>♥ QJ52<br>♦ A83<br>♣ T652</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 4<br>♥ KT74<br>♦ QJT6<br>♣ Q973</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJT862<br>♥ 86<br>♦ K94<br>♣ AJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The straightforward chance to avoid one of the diamond losers is the diamond finesse. However, there is also the possibility of a club finesse. By combining two 50% chances, you give yourself a 75% chance of success.

You need to take the chances in the right order. If you start with the diamond finesse and it loses, it will be too late to fall back on the club finesse. The defenders can take their heart winner and three diamond winners. If you start with the club finesse and it loses, you can still fall back on the diamond finesse.

Since you didn't start with a club loser, there is a slight risk you will go down an extra trick by taking the club finesse. If the club finesse loses, West can lead a heart to East's ♥K. East can then lead a diamond, trapping the ♦K when West holds the ♦A. That's down two. However, that is only a 25% chance, so you are best to go with the 75% odds.

Two chances are better than one.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/02)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/30)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/04)

### By Date

Use the links below.