---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-02'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/02'

next: false
---

# 2024-12-03

In today's deal, partner has led the suit you opened. Is that enough?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ4<br>♥ AQT832<br>♦ 84<br>♣ 54</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. With neither side vulnerable, you have to decide what call to make in first position.

You have 11 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit. That's too much for a weak two-bid in first position. Instead, you simply open at the one level.

West overcalls 1NT. This shows about the same as a 1NT opening bid, with two differences. The point range is a little broader, about 15-18, and the hand should have at least one stopper in the suit bid by the opponents. Partner, North, passes, and East bids 2NT, showing an invitational hand worth about 8-9 points. The auction is back to you.

With partner passing and the opponents bidding strongly, you have no reason to bid any more.

West accepts the invitation by bidding 3NT. Partner and East both pass. You have one last chance to make a call.

You have nothing to say, and your pass ends the auction. Your partner is now on lead against West's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♥J, the suit you opened, and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QT9<br>♥ 96<br>♦ QT9<br>♣ A9863</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ4<br>♥ AQT832<br>♦ 84<br>♣ 54</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays the ♥6 from dummy, and you are faced with your first decision. What are you playing to the first trick?

Partner has done well to lead your suit. It looks like the best chance to defeat the 3NT contract.

Who has the ♥K?

It must be West. West showed a heart stopper by overcalling 1NT. Despite that, you want to continue to establish winners in your heart suit. You might consider making an encouraging attitude signal with the ♥8.

Let's see how this will work out on this deal. Suppose you play the ♥8 to the first trick. Once declarer wins the ♥K, your remaining hearts will all be winners and you have the ♠A as an entry. Declarer, however, doesn't win this trick with the ♥K. Instead, declarer lets your partner's ♥J win the trick. Declarer has made a hold up play, declining to win the ♥K right away. Declarer is hoping to run one defender out of the suit - North in this case - to break the communication between the defenders.

Despite your encouraging attitude signal, partner does not continue hearts. Partner switches to the ♠2. Did partner miss your signal? Or did partner perhaps interpret it as a suit preference signal for the higher-ranking suit, spades?

The ♠10 is played from dummy, and you win the as declarer follows with a low spade. What now?

Let's suppose you play the ♥A. You still want to drive out declarer's ♥K and establish the remainder of your hearts as winners. Declarer and dummy follow with low hearts, but partner discards a low diamond. Now you know why partner didn't continue with another heart. You continue with the ♥Q, and this time declarer wins the ♥K, discarding a spade from dummy. Your remaining hearts are now established as winners... if you can regain the lead.

Declarer leads a low club to the ♣A in dummy as both you and partner follow with low clubs. Declarer continues with a low club from dummy and takes a finesse of the ♣J, losing to your partner's ♣Q.

Your side has regained the lead. However, partner has no hearts to lead and, with your ♠A gone, you have no more entries to your hand.

Partner leads a low diamond, but declarer wins. Declarer takes a trick with the ♠K.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks. Declarer's clubs are winners and declarer has more than enough winners in diamonds and spades, making the 3NT contract.

Declarer made a good play by holding up winning the ♥K. It wouldn't have helped if you had held up winning the ♠A. Declarer can always establish four club tricks to go with the four diamond tricks and the spade trick.

Could your side have defeated the contract? The key decision was at trick one?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Defense

When partner leads the ♥J at trick one, you can see that you have all the high hearts except the ♥K. Dummy's ♥9 will fall on the second round of hearts.

So you can afford to overtake partner's ♥J with the ♥A in case partner doesn't have any more hearts to lead.

You can now continue leading hearts to drive out declarer's ♥K. Does it matter which of your high hearts you lead next?

If partner gains the lead before you do, partner will need to know how to get to your hand. To show an entry in the highest-ranking suit, spades, you should play your highest heart at each opportunity.

So you should continue with your highest-ranking heart at trick two, the ♥Q, to show that your entry is in spades.

Declarer wins the ♥K, and partner discards a low diamond as dummy's ♥9 falls. Your remaining hearts are all winners now, and you still have the ♠A as an entry.

Declarer leads a low club to the ♣A, as you and partner follow with low clubs. Declarer leads a low club from dummy and, when you follow with a low cub, tries finessing the ♣J, but this loses to partner's ♣Q. Your side has regained the lead.

Trusting your play of the ♥Q at trick two to be a suit preference signal for spades, partner now leads a spade and you win the ♠A. You can now take the four established heart winners.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but the 3NT contract has gone down three tricks. Your side got five heart tricks, a club, and a spade. A three-trick difference for overtaking!

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 86532<br>♥ J<br>♦ 6532<br>♣ QT2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K7<br>♥ K754<br>♦ AKJ7<br>♣ KJ7</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QT9<br>♥ 96<br>♦ QT9<br>♣ A9863</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ4<br>♥ AQT832<br>♦ 84<br>♣ 54</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If partner returned a diamond rather than a spade after winning the declarer would make the contract. Declarer would have four diamond tricks to go with four club tricks and the heart trick. So it was important to communicate to partner that your entry was in spades rather than diamonds.

In addition to giving a suit preference signal to partner with the order in which you played the hearts, you have another opportunity to show suit preference for spades. When declarer plays on clubs, you can play your high club first followed by your lower-ranking club. There is no need to give partner a count signal in clubs since your attitude toward clubs is already known. It's declarer's suit, not yours.

The tools you have for signaling as a defender are very limited. They must be used in context, trying to communicate the most important information. If you held the ♦A instead of the ♠A, you would try to send that message by leading the ♥10 at trick two and also by playing the low-high when following suit in clubs.

Sometimes, signals can be very obvious. At other times, they are more subtle and require a greater depth of attention to detail.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/03)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/26)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/03#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.