---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-04'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/04'

next:
  text: '2024-12-06'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/06'
---

# 2024-12-05

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ<br>♥ <br>♦ AQJT984<br>♣ 7432</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

You have 12 high-card points plus 3 length points for the seven-card diamond suit. Although you have a good seven-card suit, the hand is too strong for a preemptive opening in first position. You have enough to open your long suit at the one level.

West makes a preemptive jump overcall of 3♥. Your partner, North, bids 3NT, and East advances to 4♥. You must decide what to do after all this action.

Partner presumably has one or more heart stoppers and approximately opening bid values to bid 3NT. At favorable vulnerability, the opponents are likely to be sacrificing against your side's vulnerable game. Since your side presumably has the majority of strength, a pass by you would be forcing, leaving it to partner to decide whether to double for penalty or bid on. Since partner has some values in hearts, it might be right to defend for penalty against 4♥. However, your hand is very distributional and more suitable for offense than defense. Partner presumably has some length in diamonds, so it doesn't appear that you are going to get much of a penalty, if any, defending against 4♥. It seems better to bid on, in hopes of making a game your way. So let's go with bidding 5♦.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 5♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>5♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥Q, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T64<br>♥ AK<br>♦ K6532<br>♣ KT8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQ<br>♥ <br>♦ AQJT984<br>♣ 7432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner does have two heart tricks and would have an easy time taking at least nine tricks in 3NT. With partner holding five diamonds, you would not get any diamond tricks on defense since one of the opponents must be void. So you wouldn't get much penalty, if any, defending against 4♥.

Anyway, your focus is now on making eleven tricks in diamonds, and you start by considering the potential losers. You don't have any diamond or heart losers. However, you do have a potential spade loser since the opponents hold the ♠A. You start with four potential club losers since you are missing the ♣A-Q-J-9. So that's a total of five losers and you can afford only two.

You can't do anything about the spade loser within the suit itself. However, West has led a heart. This gives you the opportunity to discard the ♠K-Q on dummy's ♥A-K. You would then be left with no spade losers.

In clubs, there won't be a problem with the fourth club in your hand. It can be ruffed in dummy if necessary. You may be able to avoid another club loser with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♣A by leading toward dummy's ♣K. That would leave you with only two club losers. Alternatively, since West has led a heart, you could discard two of your clubs on dummy's ♥A-K. If West holds the ♣A, you can then hold the club losers to one by leading toward dummy's ♣K.

So you have a decision right away. Should you discard both spades on the ♥A-K and rely on holding your four club losers to two? Or should you discard two clubs and rely on holding your remaining two club losers to one?

Let's take a look at both choices.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥Q.

Let's look at what will happen if you choose to discard two club losers on dummy's ♥A-K. On dummy's ♥K, you discard one of your low clubs. On the ♥A, you discard another low club. You cross to your hand with a diamond, drawing the defenders' lone trump at the same time. With a sure spade loser remaining, you need to avoid one club loser. The only chance is that West holds the ♣A. When you lead a club to dummy's ♣K, East wins the ♣A. That's unfortunate.

Since you still have a spade loser and a club loser, 5♦ is going down one.

So discarding two clubs on dummy's ♥A-K leaves you with a 50% chance of making the contract. You need West to hold the ♣A rather than East.

Can you improve the odds by discarding your two spades?

Let's see.

## Another Possible Play

West leads the ♥Q, and this time you discard one of your spades on the ♥K. You discard your other spade on the ♥A. No more spade loser.

Suppose you now draw the defenders' trump and get to your hand. With no spade loser, you now need to hold the club losers to two. Suppose you lead a club and West follows with a low club. Which club should you play from dummy?

This time, there's no hurry to play dummy's ♣K. You can always try that next time. Instead, you can give yourself the chance that West started with the ♣Q-J and play dummy's ♣10. If East holds the ♣A, East will have to win it and your troubles are over. However you have another choice. You can play the ♣8. If West started with the ♣J-9 or ♣Q-9, then East can win with the ♣Q or ♣J. Next time, you can lead to dummy's ♣10, trapping West's remaining honor and forcing East to win the ♣A. Your ♣K would then be a winner. So should you play dummy's or ♣8?

The ♣8. The ♣10 works only if West holds the ♣Q-J. The ♣8 works if West holds either the ♣Q-9 or ♣J-9. So playing the ♣8 is a 2-1 favorite.

Unfortunately, the ♣8 loses to East's ♣9. So much for that chance. You'll be okay if East leads another club, however. Then you are sure to get a trick with the ♣K.

To your dismay, East leads the ♠A, and you have to ruff. You still have your second chance - that West started with the ♣A. Sadly, the ♣K loses to East's ♣A.

East leads another spade, and you have to ruff again. You still have to give up a third club trick to the opponents. At least you are pleased that West didn't start with both the ♣Q and ♣J. You didn't misguess when you played dummy's ♣8. But 5♦ is still down one.

Discarding the spades rather than the clubs improved the odds. It gave you the chance that West held the ♣Q-9 or ♣J-9 in addition to the chance that West held the ♣A. That improves the odds from 50% to nearly 65%. But could you do even better?

It would be nice if you could have forced East to return a club after winning the first club trick. Unfortunately, East was able to lead a spade and put you back on lead.

Let's see what you can do about that.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥Q, and you discard one of your spades on dummy's ♥K. You discard your other spade on the ♥A. You are now at the critical point in the play. What should you do next?

Lead a spade!

Since you don't want East to have the option of leading a spade after gaining the lead in clubs, you need to eliminate dummy's spades. However, you need to take a little care when ruffing a spade.

Ruff with a high diamond, not the ♦4!

You are going to need the ♦4 later.

Next, you draw the missing trump and cross to dummy's ♦K at the same time. Again, you are careful to keep the ♦4 for later. Now that you are in dummy, you can eliminate another of dummy's spades. Once more, you are careful to ruff with a high diamond, keeping the precious ♦4 in your hand. Finally, you can make good use of the carefully-preserved ♦4. You can use it as a link card to get to dummy. You now eliminate dummy's last spade by ruffing it.

It's time to lead a club. When you lead a low club and West plays a low club, which club should you play from dummy?

Anything but the ♣K!

You just need to cover whatever West plays to make sure that East wins the trick.

Let's suppose you play the ♣8 and East wins the ♣9. East is endplayed. Because you eliminated all the spades in your combined hands and the hearts are also eliminated, it won't help East to lead a spade or a heart. That would give you a ruff and a sluff. You would ruff in your hand and sluff - discard - a club from dummy. You would then be left with only one club loser.

East's only other option is to lead a club, exactly what you want. East takes the ♣A, establishing dummy's ♣K as a winner. Even if East had led a low club and West held the ♣A, dummy's ♣K would become a winner. East leads another club to dummy's ♣K winner.

You have the rest of the tricks, making the 5♦ contract. You lost two tricks, but that's all.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T64<br>♥ AK<br>♦ K6532<br>♣ KT8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J32<br>♥ QJT9765<br>♦ <br>♣ Q65</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ A9875<br>♥ 8432<br>♦ 7<br>♣ AJ9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQ<br>♥ <br>♦ AQJT984<br>♣ 7432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You did well to bid 5♦. With the very lucky lie in both spades and clubs, East-West can actually make 4♥, losing two hearts and a spade.

It is clearly better to discard your spades on dummy's hearts. Being able to have both of the losses you can afford in the club suit is better than trying to keep the losses to one trick by relying on West, the preemptor to hold the ♣A. The club suit offers better than a 50% chance of losing only one trick. As you've seen, you can turn that into 100% with careful play.

West had to find a spade lead or a club lead to defeat 5♦. Once West leads a heart, you don't want to give the defenders a second chance.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/05)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/06)

### By Date

Use the links below.