---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-05'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/05'

next: false
---

# 2024-12-06

On this deal, can you correctly guess what to do in a critical suit?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKQJ53<br>♥ K8<br>♦ 732<br>♣ KJ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Both sides are vulnerable. West is the dealer and passes. Your partner, North, also passes, and so does East. You have to decide what call to make in fourth position.

With 17 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit, you are in the maximum-range for an opening bid at the one level, 19-21 points. You start with the six-card spade suit and hope partner has enough to respond.

West passes again, and partner raises to 2♠. East passes, and you have to choose a rebid.

Partner's raise shows three-card or longer support for spades. So you know Where the partnership belongs: spades. Since partner has only raised to the two level, showing about 6-9 or 10 points, there can't be enough combined strength for slam. You know How High the partnership belongs: game. You can simply take the partnership to game in spades.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦10, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 874<br>♥ J7643<br>♦ KQ<br>♣ 962</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQJ53<br>♥ K8<br>♦ 732<br>♣ KJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You now have to find a way to take the ten tricks needed to make the contract.

In planning the play in a suit contract, you start by considering the number of losers you have. How many losers are there in the 4♠ contract?

There are no spade losers, but there are two potential heart losers since you are missing both the ♥A and ♥Q. There are also two potential diamond losers. You are missing the ♦A, and you have a third diamond in your hand to take care of. There are two potential club losers since you are missing both the ♣A and ♣Q. That's a lot of losers to be concerned about. Three more than you can afford.

Assuming you have to play the heart suit yourself, the only hope is that East holds the ♥A. You can then avoid one of the heart losers with the help of a finesse by leading a heart from dummy toward your ♥K. You are still left with one sure loser in the suit.

In diamonds, there is nothing you can do about the ♦A. In fact, since West has led the suit, it looks like you are going to lose that trick right away. However, you can plan to ruff one of your low diamonds in dummy to avoid losing a second trick in the suit.

In clubs, you have one sure loser, but you may be able to avoid a second loser. You can plan to lead a low club from dummy toward your hand and guess whether to play the ♣K or ♣J if East plays a low club. If East has the ♣Q and West has the ♣A, the winning play is to finesse the ♣J. West will then have to win the trick with the ♣A and you will lose only one trick in the suit. If East has the ♣A and West has the ♣Q, however, the winning play is to play the ♣K when you lead a low club from dummy. That will win, and you will then lose only one trick in the suit.

In summary, to avoid losing more than three tricks, you are going to have to plan to lead toward the ♥K, hoping East holds the ♥A, ruff a diamond loser in dummy, and lead a club from dummy and choose whether to play the ♣K or ♣J. A lot of work. Are there any other concerns?

You will need to handle both the trump suit and the dummy entries carefully. Since you have to ruff a diamond in dummy, you can't afford to draw three rounds of trumps before taking care of this. You also need to lead both toward your ♥K and toward your ♣K-J, so you will need two entries to dummy to be able to do this.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦10. You play the ♦Q from dummy, and East wins the trick with the ♦A. East now shifts to a spade. East can see you might be planning to ruff diamond losers in dummy and wants to remove some of dummy's trumps. You win the trick in your hand.

You can't afford to play a second round of trumps at this point. You need to take care of your other diamond loser first, and you don't want to give the defenders a chance to lead a third round of trumps if they gain the lead. You cross to dummy's ♦K. You need to get it out of the way so you can ruff your diamond loser.

Now that you are in dummy, you want to use the opportunity to take one of the finesses that are necessary to your plan. Let's suppose you choose to lead a low heart. East plays low, and you try the ♥K. Your finesse works, as West follows with a low heart. So far, so good. You are only going to lose one heart trick.

Now that you are back in your hand, you can afford to draw a second round of trumps. That's a good idea in case the defenders' trumps are divided 2-2. They then won't have any trumps left to cause you any difficulties. West, however, shows out on this trick, discarding a diamond. You can't afford to draw any more trumps. You need to take care of your diamond loser. So you lead your last diamond and ruff it in dummy. Fortunately, East follows suit.

Since you are in dummy for the last time, you have to use this opportunity to lead a club. East follows with a low club, and you are at the critical point in the play. Which club are you playing to this trick?

Let's suppose you decide to finesse the ♣K, hoping East holds the ♣A. West, however, produces the ♣A and wins the trick.

West plays another diamond, forcing you to ruff the trick. You can draw East's remaining trump.

You still have to lose a heart trick and a club trick. Together with the ♦A and ♣A that you already lost, 4♠ will be down one. You made the right guess for which defender held the ♥A but the wrong guess for the ♣A.

Could you have known for sure whether to play the ♣K or ♣J?

Let's go back and look.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♦10.

Before you play to the first trick, consider what you need to do to make the contract. Since the defenders hold the ♦A, you will have to lose a diamond trick. Nothing you can do about it. After that, you can afford to lose only one heart trick and one club trick. So, the contract hinges on finding the locations of the ♥A and ♣A. Are there any clues on how you should play the heart suit and club suit?

Yes!

Let's review the auction. Both East and West passed throughout the auction. That doesn't seem to be much help, but the opponents' silence can be revealing. Both had an opportunity to open the bidding, but neither did so.

So neither East nor West has about 13 or more points.

You know from West's opening lead of the ♦10 that East holds the ♦A. West is unlikely to be leading a diamond away from the ♦A against a suit contract.

Which defender holds the ♦J?

Also East.

West has led the ♦10. With a diamond holding headed by the ♦10, West would have led the ♦J. So East must hold the ♦J.

Which defender holds the ♥A?

Either defender might hold the ♥A, but you need East to hold the ♥A if you are to make the contract.

If West holds the ♥A, you will have to lose two heart tricks since you will lose to the ace when you finesse your ♥K. So you are going to have to assume East holds it.

Can East hold the ♣A?

No... at least not if you are hoping to make the contract.

If East held the ♣A in addition to the ♥A and ♦A-J, East would have opened the bidding. Since East passed, you are going to assume that West holds the ♣A and hope that East holds the ♣Q.

Assuming the ♥A and ♣A are located favorably, you will also need to be careful of entries. You'll need to lead both suits toward your ♥K and toward your ♣K-J, so you'll need two entries to dummy to be able to do this.

Going through all this work before playing to the first trick helps you formulate a complete plan for playing the deal.

Let's see how this can improve the actual play. On the first trick, East wins the ♦A, as you expected. East shifts to a spade, trying to prevent you from ruffing diamond losers with dummy's trumps. You win the trick with the ♠J.

You delay drawing any more trumps until you can set up a diamond ruff. To do that, you cross to dummy's ♦K. You take advantage of your first chance being in dummy to take one of the finesses in your plan. Should you start with the heart or club finesse?

The heart finesse.

You need the heart finesse to work to make the contract. And if it works, you will have the information to decide what to do with the club suit.

Let's see how this works. You lead a low heart, and East plays low. You play the ♥K and the finesse works. East still has the ♥A.

You can afford to draw a second round of trumps. West, however, shows out on this trick. You get rid of your diamond loser by ruffing it in dummy. East follows with a diamond. You now have the entry you need to take the club finesse. You lead dummy's ♣2, and East follows with the ♣4. Do you play the ♣K or ♣J?

East didn't open the bidding and has shown up with the ♦A-J and ♥A. East can't also hold the ♣A. So you take your only chance and play the ♣J. West wins this trick with the ♣A, and your challenges are over. You have "guessed" correctly in the club suit.

You still have a heart to lose, but that's all. You've lost one diamond and one club, so you have held your losses to three tricks. That's pretty good since the defenders held three aces.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 874<br>♥ J7643<br>♦ KQ<br>♣ 962</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T<br>♥ QT2<br>♦ T9854<br>♣ AT73</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 962<br>♥ A95<br>♦ AJ6<br>♣ Q854</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQJ53<br>♥ K8<br>♦ 732<br>♣ KJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The key to making this contract was to guess what to do in the club suit. You didn't have any choice in the heart suit or the diamond suit. You also had to make the critical assumption that East needed to hold the ♥A if you were to make the contract. That inference, combined with the fact that East did not open the bidding, placed the ♣A in the West hand. You then had only one way to play the club suit... hoping that East held the ♣Q.

Having worked all this out ahead of time, you would also be prepared if East led a low club at trick two instead of a spade.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/06)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/05)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/06#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.