---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-08'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/08'

next:
  text: '2024-12-10'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/10'
---

# 2024-12-09

In this column, can you put all the high cards to work?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T95<br>♥ T4<br>♦ A63<br>♣ A8754</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South with both sides vulnerable. North is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♦. East passes. It's your first opportunity to make a call.

There are 8 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card club suit. That's not enough to respond in a new suit at the two level, 2♣. There is no four-card or longer major to bid and, with only three diamonds, raising diamonds is not attractive. The best choice is to keep the auction alive by responding 1NT, showing about 6-9 or 10 points.

After you respond 1NT, everyone passes, ending the auction. You are now declarer in 1NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥5. Dummy comes down with a balanced hand hand and 14 high-card points.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQ<br>♥ KQ63<br>♦ T754<br>♣ 92</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T95<br>♥ T4<br>♦ A63<br>♣ A8754</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You need seven tricks in 1NT.

In a notrump contract, begin making your plan by counting the sure winners you have. There are three sure spade winners, dummy's ♠A-K-Q. There are no immediate heart winners since the opponents hold the ♥A. There is one sure club winner, your ♣A. There is one sure diamond winner, your ♦A. That's a total of five sure winners: three spades, one club, and one diamond. You need to find two more tricks to make the contract.

The heart suit will provide two tricks with the help of a repeated finesse if West holds the ♥A. Even if East holds the ♥A, you will promote one extra winner.

The club suit might provide two extra tricks through length if the six missing clubs divide 3-3. That's against the odds. One extra winner might be established if the missing clubs divide 4-2, which is with the odds. However, you don't have the entries to both establish the suit and then reach the winners.

The diamond suit might provide one extra trick through length if the defenders' six diamonds divide 3-3, but that's against the odds. There are some additional chances for a second diamond trick. For example, if East started with a doubleton ♦Q-J, you might be able to arrange to lead toward dummy's ♦10 on the third round of the suit to establish a winner.

It appears the most straightforward approach is to hope West holds the ♥A. Since West has led a heart, that improves the odds West has led from a suit headed by the ♥A. Will that be good enough on this deal?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥5. Suppose you play the ♥Q from dummy, hoping West has led from a suit headed by the ♥A. Unfortunately, East wins the ♥A. So much for that chance. East returns the ♥8, you play the ♥10, and West plays the ♥J. You choose to hold up winning this trick. West continues with the ♥9 and you win dummy's ♥K as East shows out, discarding a low spade. West still has two established heart winners remaining.

You still need to find a seventh trick and you can hope the diamond suit divides in a friendly fashion. Both defenders follow when you play a low diamond to the ♦A. West wins the ♦Q when you play a second round of diamonds. East follows with a low diamond.

West takes one of the established heart winners as East discards a club. West takes another heart winner as East discards a spade. You discard clubs from both hands. You are hoping West will lead a spade so you can try to establish a diamond winner. West, however, leads the ♣K, driving out your ♣A.

It would be dangerous to lead a diamond now since the defenders would have one or more club winners to take even if the diamonds divide favorably. Instead, you take the three spade winners.

The defenders have the last two tricks and the contract is down one. The VA was unfavorably located and, as it turns out, neither the diamonds nor the clubs divide favorably.

Could the contract have been made anyway?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥5.

Although there will be no problem getting two heart tricks if West holds the ♥A, you do have a valuable card in your hand, the ♥10.

You can make use of it to guarantee two heart tricks. Let's see how.

You play a low heart from dummy!

Let's look at the remaining cards to see why this is a good idea.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQ<br>♥ KQ63<br>♦ T754<br>♣ 92</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 8743<br>♥ J9752<br>♦ Q8<br>♣ KJ</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J62<br>♥ A8<br>♦ KJ92<br>♣ QT63</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T95<br>♥ T4<br>♦ A63<br>♣ A8754</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

East has to play the ♥A to win the trick, otherwise you would win the ♥10. That establishes dummy's ♥K and ♥Q. East returns a heart. You play the ♥10 and West covers with the ♥J. You win dummy's ♥Q.

You have three spade winners to take. You can take the remaining established heart winner since this is the last time you will be in dummy. The ♦A is your sixth trick. The ♣A is your seventh trick.

The defenders have the rest of the tricks, but you have made the contract. You took three spade tricks, two heart tricks, one club trick, and one diamond trick.

But what if East held the ♥J instead of West?

Let's see if that would make any difference.

## Another Possibility

This time, East holds the ♥J.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQ<br>♥ KQ63<br>♦ T754<br>♣ 92</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 8743<br>♥ A9752<br>♦ Q8<br>♣ KJ</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J62<br>♥ J8<br>♦ KJ92<br>♣ QT63</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T95<br>♥ T4<br>♦ A63<br>♣ A8754</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When West leads the ♥5 and you play a low heart from dummy, East wins the first trick with the ♥J. That's okay.

Suppose East shifts to a diamond. You win the ♦A. You can now lead the ♥10. If West wins the ♥A, you will have immediately established the two extra heart winners you need. Suppose West plays a low heart, letting you win the ♥10. You can cross to dummy with a spade. You lead the ♥K and, this time, West wins the ♥A.

West takes a trick with the ♦Q. West leads another heart and dummy's ♥Q wins. You have the second extra heart winner you need. You can take the two remaining spade winners. The ♣A is your seventh trick.

The defenders have the rest of the tricks, but again you've made the contract. Playing a low heart at trick one helped develop the two extra heart winners you needed.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQ<br>♥ KQ63<br>♦ T754<br>♣ 92</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 8743<br>♥ J9752<br>♦ Q8<br>♣ KJ</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J62<br>♥ A8<br>♦ KJ92<br>♣ QT63</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T95<br>♥ T4<br>♦ A63<br>♣ A8754</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

It's important to recognize the power of the ♥10 when West leads a low heart against your notrump contract. By playing low from dummy, you guarantee two heart tricks no matter which defender holds the ♥J and which defender holds the ♥A.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/09)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/07)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/09#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.