---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-09'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/09'

next:
  text: '2024-12-11'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/11'
---

# 2024-12-10

In today's deal, what is the best discard?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 94<br>♥ J75<br>♦ KQT97<br>♣ Q63</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. With neither side vulnerable, West is the dealer and opens 1♥. Your partner, North, makes a preemptive jump overcall of 2♠, showing a good six-card suit but a weak hand. East raises to 3♥. You must decide what to do after this start.

With only 8 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit and only a doubleton in partner's suit, there's no reason to get involved in the auction.

West continues to 4♥. Partner and East both pass. You have another chance to make a call.

Naturally, you pass.

You are now on defense against West's 4♥ contract with partner on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♠A, and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q3<br>♥ T94<br>♦ AJ853<br>♣ K87</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 94<br>♥ J75<br>♦ KQT97<br>♣ Q63</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

A low spade is played from dummy. You have your first decision. What are you playing to this trick?

With a doubleton spade, you play the ♠9 as the start of an encouraging high-low attitude signal. You hope partner also holds the ♠K and can play a third round of spades after winning the first two tricks. If declarer ruffs in dummy, you can overruff.

If you couldn't overruff, you might not want to encourage partner to continue with a third spade.

Declarer follows with a low spade. Partner has won the first trick. Partner continues with the ♠K. Dummy's ♠Q is played, you finish the high-low signal in spades, and declarer follows with another low spade. Partner has won the first two spades.

Encouraged by your high-low signal, partner continues with the ♠J. That's what you were hoping for. Assuming declarer started with three spades, if declarer ruffs in dummy, you can overruff. That will be the third trick for the defense and you'll need only one more. Declarer surprises you, however. Instead of ruffing in dummy, declarer discards a low club. You have another key decision. What are you playing to this trick?

You no longer need to ruff. Assuming declarer started with three spades, partner's ♠J is going to win the trick.

With a strong holding in diamonds, it appears you can make an encouraging attitude signal.

Let's see what will happen if you do. Suppose you discard the ♦10, an encouraging signal. Declarer follows with a low spade. As you expected, partner's has won the trick. Your side has the first three tricks.

Heeding your signal, partner switches to the ♦6. Declarer wins dummy's ♦A, and you finish your high-low encouraging attitude signal. Declarer follows with a low diamond.

Declarer starts drawing trumps by leading a heart from dummy to the ♥Q. Partner follows with a low heart. Doesn't look as though you are getting any trump tricks. Declarer continues with the ♥K. Partner shows out, discarding a spade, as you and dummy follow with low hearts. Declarer started with a six-card heart suit.

Declarer now plays a low club to dummy's ♣K as you and partner follow with low clubs. Declarer plays dummy's remaining club and wins the ♣A. Declarer leads another club and ruffs with dummy's ♥10. Declarer leads a low diamond from dummy and ruffs it. So much for getting any diamond tricks. Declarer plays the ♥A, drawing your last trump.

Declarer has the last two tricks with trump winners in hand, making the 4♥ contract. Declarer lost only three spade tricks.

Was there anything you could have done about it?

Let's go back and look.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♠A, winning the first trick as you start an encouraging attitude signal. Partner continues with the ♠K, winning the second trick. Partner now plays the ♠J. Instead of ruffing in dummy, declarer discards a club from dummy.

Why didn't declarer ruff the spade?

Declarer knows from your partner's weak jump overcall and your high-low in spades that you will simply overruff if declarer ruffs. Declarer knows the trick has to be lost.

Why did declarer choose to discard a club rather than a diamond?

Declarer might have a club loser and is hoping to ruff it in dummy by shortening dummy's clubs.

What can you do about it?

You can also discard a club!

You can shorten your club holding to the same length as dummy.

Partner switches to a diamond, and declarer wins dummy's ♦A as you make an encouraging attitude signal. Declarer starts drawing trumps by playing a heart to the ♥Q. Declarer is hoping the four missing hearts are divided 2-2. Declarer continues with the ♥K. Unfortunately for declarer, your partner shows out. The hearts have divided 3-1.

Declarer still has a club loser to eliminate. Declarer plays a club to dummy's ♣K as both you and partner follow with low clubs. Declarer plays dummy's remaining club. You play the ♣Q, and declarer wins with the ♣A as your partner follows with another low club. Declarer leads a third round of clubs. Partner plays the ♣J, and declarer ruffs with dummy's ♥10. Now your earlier club discard pays off. You can overruff with the ♥J.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but the contract is down one. Your side took three spade tricks and a heart trick.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJT75<br>♥ 6<br>♦ 64<br>♣ J942</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 862<br>♥ AKQ832<br>♦ 2<br>♣ AT5</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q3<br>♥ T94<br>♦ AJ853<br>♣ K87</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 94<br>♥ J75<br>♦ KQT97<br>♣ Q63</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer played the hand nicely. Declarer could see it wasn't going to work to ruff the third round of spades in dummy. You would overruff, and declarer would eventually be left with a club loser. Declarer decided a better plan would be to try to ruff the club loser in dummy. Declarer would be able to safely ruff the third round of clubs in dummy if the trumps divided 2-2, or if you started with four or more clubs, or if you held on to three clubs.

To counter declarer's plan, you have to also discard a club.

What if declarer held the ♣J instead of partner?

Then declarer was always making the contract whether or not you discarded a club.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/10)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/03)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/10#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.