---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-11'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/11'

next:
  text: '2024-12-13'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/13'
---

# 2024-12-12

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT83<br>♥ KJ9<br>♦ A32<br>♣ AT9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make in first position.

You have a balanced hand with 16 high-card points. That's perfect for a 1NT opening bid when the partnership range is 15-17 points.

West passes, and partner, North, raises to 3NT. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

You have nothing more to say. Partner has decided the partnership belongs in game in notrump.

West passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥4. Partner puts down the dummy, and you have to find a way to take the nine tricks needed to make the contract.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J4<br>♥ QT<br>♦ KQ765<br>♣ J432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AT83<br>♥ KJ9<br>♦ A32<br>♣ AT9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 9 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit, making the hand strong enough to go right to game.

In planning the play in a notrump contract, start by considering the number of sure tricks you have. There is one sure spade trick, the ♠A. You don't start with any sure heart tricks, but West has led a heart. Whatever East plays to the first trick, you are assured of one heart winner. In fact, since the opponents are likely to continue trying to establish tricks in the heart suit, you can count on two heart tricks. There is one sure club trick, the ♣A. There are three sure diamond tricks, the ♦A, ♦K, and ♦Q. That's seven winners, a spade, two hearts, a club, and three diamonds. You need to find two more.

You aren't getting any more tricks from hearts.

You might get an extra trick from spades with a very favorable lie of the defenders' spades - the ♠K-Q with East, for example. However, you don't want to have to go looking for a trick there unless you are desperate.

In clubs, you could try to develop one or two extra tricks with the help of a repeated finesse. You can lead a low club from dummy and finesse the ♣9. If this loses, you can plan to lead another club from dummy and finesse the ♣10 if East follows with a low club. That will give you one extra trick if East holds the ♣K, or or both the ♣K and ♣Q. It will give you a second extra trick if the defenders' clubs are divided 3-3 or East started with a singleton, doubleton, or tripleton honor.

A much more straightforward place to get the extra tricks is the diamond suit. If the five missing diamonds in the defenders' hands are divided 3-2, you will get two extra tricks through length. The odds for that are nearly 70%. Even if the diamonds divide 4-1 , you can get one extra trick by giving up a diamond.

Is there any potential danger?

Yes. West has led a heart and you have only two stoppers in the suit. If West started with five hearts, you can afford to give up the lead only once since the defenders will have established three heart winners.

Let's see why that might impact the order in which you plan to play this deal.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥4. You play the ♥10 from dummy, and it wins the first trick as East follows with the ♥2. Since East will typically give a count signal in this situation, when unable to beat dummy's card, it looks as though East is starting a low-high signal showing three hearts. That means West started with five hearts. You are now at the critical point in the play. What are you playing next?

If diamonds divide 3-2, you will have an easy nine tricks, so it looks as though you should start there.

Let's see what will happen if you do. Suppose you play a diamond to the OA at trick two. Both defenders follow suit. So far, so good. You continue with a diamond to dummy's ♦Q, but West shows out, discarding a spade. This is that 30% of the time when the suit doesn't divide 3-2. Should you continue with diamonds and establish one extra winner in the suit?

That won't work. Even if you set up an extra diamond winner in dummy, you'll have no entry to reach it. Instead, it looks as though you'll have to look for the extra tricks in the club suit.

Suppose you now lead a low club and East follows with a low club. You finesse the ♣9 and it loses to West's ♣Q. West takes a trick with the ♥A. West continues with another heart. You discard a diamond from dummy and win with the ♥K as East follows with another low heart.

To repeat the club finesse, you need to get back to dummy. You can get there with your last diamond winner. You lead another club from dummy and, when East plays low again, you finesse the ♣10. This time, your finesse wins as West follows with a low club. That's good. You have one of the extra tricks you need. You take the ♣A and both defenders follow suit with East's ♣K falling. Dummy's ♣J is now a winner.

But there's a problem. There is no entry to dummy's club winner. You have eight tricks, but no way to reach your ninth trick. 3NT is down one. When the diamonds broke badly, you were unable to recover.

So let's go back to trick one.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥4 and you win the first trick with dummy's ♥10. You are at a critical point in the play. If the defenders' diamonds are divided 3-2, you will always make 3NT, but what if they don't?

You should prepare a "just in case" Plan B. It can't hurt to play a club at this point and take the first finesse. You play a low club and, when East follows with a low club, you finesse the ♣9. This loses to West's ♣Q.

West continues with a low heart, and you win with dummy's ♥Q. What now?

It would be dangerous to take another club finesse at this point. If it loses, you will go down when the diamonds might have been divided 3-2 all along. So you play a diamond to your ♦A, planning to take your five diamond winners. Both defenders follow to the first round of diamonds. You then lead a second diamond, and you get the bad news when West shows out. You win the trick with dummy's ♦Q. What now?

You're happy you prepared for Plan B. You lead another club from dummy and, when East plays low again, you finesse the ♣10. This time, the finesse works and you are up to eight tricks. You just need a little good luck to make up for the bad luck in diamonds. You play the ♣A and both defenders follow suit, with East's ♣K falling. The defenders' clubs have divided 3-3. You get back to dummy with your last diamond. Now you can take the established club winner. The ♠A is your ninth trick.

The defenders have the rest of the tricks, but you have made the 3NT contract. You got one spade, two hearts, and only three diamond tricks, but you also got three club tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J4<br>♥ QT<br>♦ KQ765<br>♣ J432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K952<br>♥ A8743<br>♦ 9<br>♣ Q86</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q76<br>♥ 652<br>♦ JT84<br>♣ K75</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AT83<br>♥ KJ9<br>♦ A32<br>♣ AT9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When planning the play, if there is more than one chance to make the contract, you want to combine your chances whenever possible. Before eagerly attacking your strongest suit, at least ask yourself what might happen if the suit doesn't break favorably. It can never hurt to have a Plan B just in case. Whenever possible, you want to keep your long suit in reserve and go after another suit, trying to establish the extra tricks needed in case your long suit divides unfavorably.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/12)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/09)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/13)

### By Date

Use the links below.