---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/12'

next: false
---

# 2024-12-13

On this deal, can you find a way to establish an extra winner?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T3<br>♥ AQJ985<br>♦ 972<br>♣ KQ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. East is the dealer and opens 1♠. You have to decide what call to make.

You have 12 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit. With a sound opening bid and a good six-card suit, you have enough for a two-level overcall.

West passes. Partner, North, advances all the way to 4♥, and East passes. The auction is back to you.

You've done enough with the two-level overcall. Partner's raise could be with the expectation of making the contract or a preemptive action. You pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠4, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ92<br>♥ KT73<br>♦ AT4<br>♣ 86</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T3<br>♥ AQJ985<br>♦ 972<br>♣ KQ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner is obviously bidding with the expectation of making the contract.

In planning the play in a suit contract, you start by considering the potential losers you have in 4♥. How many do you have?

There are no heart losers since you are only missing three low hearts. You will be left with a potential spade loser in your hand once dummy's is gone. You will also be left with two potential diamond losers once dummy's ♦A is gone. There is one sure club loser since the opponents have the ♣A. That's four potential losers, a spade, two diamonds, and a club. You need to eliminate one of them.

There's nothing you can do to avoid the spade loser. Since West has led a spade, it looks as though dummy's ♠A is about to be driven out right away.

You won't be able to avoid a club loser.

So it appears you will have to avoid one of the diamond losers. There's no way to do that within the diamond suit itself. Unless the opponents help you out with a ruff and a sluff, the only way to eliminate a diamond loser is to discard a diamond on an extra winner in another suit. Which suit will provide the possibility of developing an extra winner?

The only possibility is the spade suit.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠4. You immediately have a key decision. Should you win this trick?

There is a possibility of establishing an extra spade winner to discard a diamond loser. One way is to rely on the finesse. Although you are missing the ♠K and ♠Q, you have all the other high spades. For example, if West has one of the spade honors and East has the other, you could first take a finesse which would lose to East's honor. On regaining the lead, you could take a second finesse against West's remaining honor. When that wins, you will have lost only one spade trick but will have the extra spade winner you need for disposing of a diamond loser. In general, that should work about 75% of the time, whenever West holds the ♠K, or the ♠Q, or both the ♠K and ♠Q. It will only lose if East has both the ♠K and ♠Q.

So let's see if the finesse will work on this deal. Suppose you start by playing a low spade from dummy. East plays the ♠Q, winning the trick. East now returns a spade. It looks as though this will help you establish an extra spade winner... so long as West has another spade to play. West, however, shows out of spades and ruffs the trick. West then leads a club to East's ♣A. East continues with another club, and you finally get to win a trick with the ♣K.

You draw the two remaining trumps from the defenders' hands with the ♥A. You lead a diamond to dummy's ♦A. You play the ♠A and discard a diamond from your hand.

However, you're still left with a diamond loser. 4♥ is down one. Even though you were able to eliminate a diamond loser, you lost an unexpected trump trick from the spade ruff.

Was there something else you might have done?

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♠4.

Before deciding what to play from dummy, you need to examine the significance of West's opening lead. What is the layout of the spade suit?

First, East has opened the bidding and is more likely to hold most of the missing high cards. More importantly, East has shown a five-card or longer suit and West has led the ♠4. It can't be top of a doubleton since you can see the two lower-ranking cards, the ♠3 in your hand and the ♠2 in the dummy. The ♠4 must be a singleton.

Since the clues from the auction and the opening lead tell you East holds the ♠K-Q, is there a possibility of establishing an extra spade winner to discard a diamond loser?

Yes!

You can make use of a ruffing finesse.

Let's see how the play should go.

At trick one, you win with dummy's ♠A.

You've already determined with your detective work that West's spade is a singleton. If you don't win this trick, East will win and lead a spade for West to ruff. What next?

There's no reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. Both defenders follow to the first round of hearts, so there is only one trump outstanding. You draw the remaining trump. What now?

You don't want to give the opponents an opportunity to drive out your ♦A before you have established a spade winner. You lead your ♠10. As you expected, West shows out and East wins the trick with the ♠Q.

East switches to a diamond, but it's too late for the defense. You win the ♦A. Now it's time to take the ruffing finesse.

Here are the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J9<br>♥ KT<br>♦ T4<br>♣ 86</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ 653<br>♣ J9543</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ K76<br>♥ <br>♦ KJ<br>♣ AT7</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ J985<br>♦ 97<br>♣ KQ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You lead the ♠J, and what can East do?

If East plays a low spade, you can discard a diamond, knowing the ♠J will win. Suppose East chooses to cover with the ♠K to prevent the ♠J from winning. That's okay. You ruff the ♠K. You get back to dummy with a trump. Now you can lead the established ♠9 and discard one of the diamond losers.

You lead a club to establish a club winner. East plays low, hoping you don't have both high club honors, but your ♣Q wins.

You still have to lose a club and a diamond, but that's all. You have the last two tricks with your remaining trumps. You've made the 4♥ contract, losing only one spade, one club, one diamond, and no spade ruff.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ92<br>♥ KT73<br>♦ AT4<br>♣ 86</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 4<br>♥ 62<br>♦ Q653<br>♣ J95432</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KQ8765<br>♥ 4<br>♦ KJ8<br>♣ AT7</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T3<br>♥ AQJ985<br>♦ 972<br>♣ KQ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Once your detective work tells you how the defenders' spades must be distributed, you can take advantage of that knowledge. You need to appreciate the value of your spade spots, your ♠10 and dummy's ♠9. Knowing that East holds both missing high cards, you can create a winner in spades without giving up a second spade trick.

A ruffing finesse occurs when you have two or more high cards in one hand and a void in the other hand.

Here, after the ♠A, ♠Q, and ♠10 are gone in the first two rounds of spades, dummy's remaining ♠J-9 allow you to trap East's ♠K with the help of the trump suit.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/13)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/12)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/13#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.