---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-15'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/15'

next:
  text: '2024-12-17'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/17'
---

# 2024-12-16

In this deal, did you get a favorable lead?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ5<br>♥ A975<br>♦ JT7<br>♣ AK8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South with both sides vulnerable. As the dealer, you have the first opportunity to open the bidding.

There are 16 high-card points. The hand is balanced and falls in the middle of the 15-17 range for an opening bid of 1NT. You open 1NT.

West passes. North raises to 3NT, and East passes. The auction is back to you.

Partner's raise to game is a signoff bid. You are expected to pass.

West passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠6. Dummy comes down with a balanced hand and 10 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 843<br>♥ K6<br>♦ AK952<br>♣ 964</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJ5<br>♥ A975<br>♦ JT7<br>♣ AK8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You need nine tricks in 3NT. In a notrump contract, begin making a plan by counting the sure winners you have. You start with no sure spade winners but West has led the ♠6. Whatever East plays to the first trick, you are assured of at least one spade trick. There are two sure heart winners, your ♥A and dummy's ♥K. There are two sure club winners, your ♣A and ♣K. There are two sure diamond winners, dummy's ♦A and ♦K. That's a total of seven sure winners: one spade, two hearts, two clubs, and two diamonds. Two more winners are needed to make the 3NT contract.

Unless East holds both the ♠A and ♠Q, you aren't getting a second trick from the spade suit. It's unlikely East holds both honors since West has chosen to lead the suit.

You won't get any more tricks from hearts or clubs unless the defenders discard too many cards in one of the suits.

The diamonds offer the only chance. You can get three extra winners with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♦Q. Even if you lose a trick to the ♦Q, you will have promoted the two extra tricks you need. So it looks like the plan is to go about establishing the diamond suit after gaining the lead.

Is there any other consideration?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠6. You play a low spade from dummy and East plays the ♠Q.

You can win this trick with the ♠K. That's the spade trick you were expecting, and you still have the as a possible second trick in the suit.

You are in the right place to try the diamond finesse. You lead the ♦J and, when West follows with a low diamond, you play a low diamond from dummy. Unfortunately, this loses to East's ♦Q. At least you have established the tricks you need to make the contract.

East returns the ♠9. You try the *J, but this loses to West's ♠A. Oh well. You'll still be okay if West started with only a four-card spade suit. Unfortunately, West has three more spade winners to take.

Whatever West leads next, you have the rest of the tricks, but the contract is down one.

Should you have played the diamonds differently?

You could afford to lose a diamond trick to West, just not to East.

Let's go back and try again.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠6. When a low spade is played from dummy, East plays the ♠Q. You are immediately at the critical point in the play.

There will be no problem if the defenders' seven spades are divided 4-3. Even if you lose a trick to the ♠Q, you will lose at most three spade tricks. The danger is if West started with a five-card spade suit. If you win the ♠K and East gains the lead to return a spade, trapping the ♠J, the contract will be defeated.

How can you guard against this possibility?

You can hold up winning the first trick, letting East's ♠Q win!

You will still get a spade trick, but you will turn East into a safe opponent.

Let's see how that works. You play a low spade to the first trick, letting East's win. There's little danger if East shifts to a heart or a club since you hold two stoppers in both those suits. East leads back the ♠9 and you play the ♠J. West wins the ♠A. Your ♠K is now established as the spade winner you were expecting.

West leads another spade, driving out your ♠K as East shows out, discarding a heart. West did indeed start with five spades and now has two more spade tricks established, but East has no spades to lead. You have turned East into a safe opponent.

You now lead the ♦J and, when West follows with a low diamond, you play from dummy. The finesse loses to East's ♦Q, but that's okay. The contract is safe.

With no spades to lead, East leads a club. You win the ♣K. You can take the four remaining diamond winners. You have the two heart winners and the remaining club winner to take. That gets you up to nine tricks.

The defenders have the last trick, but you have made the contract. You took one spade trick, two heart tricks, two club tricks, and four diamond tricks.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 843<br>♥ K6<br>♦ AK952<br>♣ 964</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT762<br>♥ J32<br>♦ 63<br>♣ QT5</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q9<br>♥ QT84<br>♦ Q84<br>♣ J732</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJ5<br>♥ A975<br>♦ JT7<br>♣ AK8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, the only danger is if the defenders can establish and take enough spade tricks to defeat the contract. There will be no problem if the diamond finesse works or West started with only four spades. However, you want to guard against the diamond finesse losing and West having a five-card spade suit. If you win the first trick, you will be okay if the diamond finesse works or even if you lose a trick to the ♦Q in West's hand.

If your diamond holding were reversed, you could afford to win the first trick and take the diamond finesse into the West hand. Even if it lost, your ♠J would prevent West from continuing spades without giving you a second trick in the suit.

On this deal, when East plays the ♠Q to the first trick, you have an opportunity to use the hold-up play to your advantage.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/16)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/14)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/16#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.