---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-16'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/16'

next:
  text: '2024-12-18'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/18'
---

# 2024-12-17

In today's deal, will partner know what to do?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J853<br>♥ AJ863<br>♦ 53<br>♣ K3</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 1NT, showing 15-17 points and a balanced hand. You must decide what call to make.

There are 9 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. Although you might overcall at the one level, neither the hand nor the suit is good enough to come in at the two level over a strong 1NT opening, especially vulnerable.

West raises to 3NT. Your partner, North, passes, and so does East. You have another chance to make a call.

Naturally, you pass and must now make the opening lead against East's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

You don't have any particular information from the auction, so the usual opening lead is fourth best from the longest and strongest suit. There's no reason to lead anything other than the ♥6. You have an entry in the heart suit itself and a possible entry with the ♣K.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♥6, and West puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 9<br>♥ 742<br>♦ AQT<br>♣ QJT764</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J853<br>♥ AJ863<br>♦ 53<br>♣ K3</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

A low heart is played from dummy, partner plays the ♥10, and declarer wins the ♥K. That seems like a good start. What do you know about declarer's heart holding?

Despite craftily winning the first trick with the ♥K, declarer must hold the ♥Q. Holding the ♥Q-10, partner would presumably have played the ♥Q, third hand high. Declarer also must hold the ♥9. Holding the ♥10-9, partner would have played the ♥9, only as high as necessary. So declarer started with the ♥K-Q-9. Partner must have started with a singleton or doubleton ♥10.

At trick two, declarer crosses to dummy with the ♦A as both you and partner play low diamonds. The ♣Q is led from dummy and partner and East both play low clubs.

It looks as though declarer is taking a club finesse, hoping your partner holds the ♣K. You win the ♣K. Now what?

You are at the critical point in the defense. Should you lead another heart?

No!

You've already worked out from the first trick that declarer still has the ♥Q-9 remaining. If you lead a heart, declarer will get a second heart trick with the ♥Q. With the club suit established, declarer will have at least nine tricks.

You want partner to lead a heart, trapping declarer's ♥Q. You need to find a way to get to partner's hand. Hopefully, partner has a heart left to return. How can you reach partner's hand?

It's apparent you can't get there by leading a club, and it looks as though declarer must hold the ♦K. So it will have to be a spade. Hopefully, partner holds the ♠A and a heart.

Does it matter which spade you lead?

Let's see. Suppose you lead the ♠3. The ♠9 is played from dummy and partner wins the ♠A as declarer follows with a low spade. Success! You've found an entry to partner's hand. Now, if partner has a heart to lead... Partner, however, leads back the ♠2 and declarer wins the trick with the ♠K.

Declarer then takes the diamond and established club winners, finishing with an overtrick. Too bad partner didn't have a heart to return.

Or did partner still have a heart?

Let's go back and look.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♥6, partner plays the ♥10, and declarer wins with the ♥K. That tells you declarer started with the ♥K-Q-9 and still has the ♥Q-9 remaining. Declarer crosses to dummy with a diamond. Declarer tries a club finesse, and you win the ♣K.

You know you want to get to partner's hand so partner can, hopefully, lead back a heart, trapping declarer's ♥Q. The only hope is in the spade suit, so you have to switch to a spade.

However, you need to be careful which spade you lead. If partner wins, you want partner to switch back to hearts, not to continue spades. In this situation, the size of the spade you lead is critical. If you lead a low spade, you are showing you hold something in the suit and are interested in having partner lead the suit back. If you lead a high spot card, you are showing no interest in having the suit returned on your account.

So you lead the ♠8!

The ♠J would be confusing, perhaps showing the ♠10 and interest in developing winners in the suit. The ♠3 is definitely a low card, and the ♠5 may also look like a low spade to partner. The ♠8 is the clearest card to show you aren't interested in spades from your side of the table.

Partner wins the ♠A, exactly as you were hoping. This time, partner gets the message and returns the ♥5. Declarer tries the ♥Q, but you win the ♥A. The ♥J wins the next trick as declarer's ♥9 falls and partner discards a club. Your remaining hearts are now established as winners. You take a trick with the ♥8. That's the fifth trick for the defense, defeating the contract. Even better, your last heart is also a winner. That's a second undertrick.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but 3NT is two down. Your side got a club, a spade, and four heart tricks.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ62<br>♥ T5<br>♦ 87642<br>♣ 82</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 9<br>♥ 742<br>♦ AQT<br>♣ QJT764</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KT74<br>♥ KQ9<br>♦ KJ9<br>♣ A95</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J853<br>♥ AJ863<br>♦ 53<br>♣ K3</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As you can see, declarer holds the ♥K-Q-9, which you can determine from the first trick, despite declarer choosing to win with the ♥K rather than the ♥Q. You couldn't be sure whether partner or declarer held the ♥5, but you had to hope it was partner.

Looking at partner's hand, you can see why partner would return a spade if you led a low spade. Partner would think declarer started with the ♥A and you had led from ♠K-10-5-3, hoping to get four spade tricks before declarer regained the lead.

When you want partner to return your first suit and not your second, you need to send the right message.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/17)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/17#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.