---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-18'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/18'

next:
  text: '2024-12-20'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/20'
---

# 2024-12-19

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKJ7652<br>♥ K3<br>♦ A<br>♣ AK2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

You have 22 high-card points plus 3 length points for the seven-card spade suit. That's too strong for a non-forcing one-level bid. Instead, you open with a strong artificial 2♣.

West overcalls 2♥. Partner, North, passes, and East advances to 3♥. The auction is back to you.

The opponents appear to be taking advantage of their vulnerability to interfere with your auction. You could bid 3♠, but that isn't 100% forcing. Partner could pass with absolutely nothing. Since you have an excellent chance to take ten tricks even if partner has as little as a couple of low spades, you can jump to 4♠ - bidding what you think you can make. Let's go with that.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦Q, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T4<br>♥ 76<br>♦ K6432<br>♣ 8743</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ7652<br>♥ K3<br>♦ A<br>♣ AK2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has a couple of spades and also the ♦K. Hopefully, that will be enough.

You start your plan by considering the potential losers in 4♠. Although there are nine combined spades, you are missing the ♠Q, so there is a potential spade loser. You have the ♥K, but the opponents have all the other high hearts. So there are two potential heart losers. You will be left with a potential club loser in your hand after the ♣A and ♣K are gone. You don't have any diamond losers. In fact, you have an extra diamond winner with dummy's ♦K on which you could potentially discard a loser in another suit. You're still left with four potential losers with a spade, two hearts, and a club, and need to avoid one of them.

You can avoid a spade loser if either defender holds a singleton or doubleton ♠Q. Alternatively, if you think East holds three spades including the ♠Q, you could plan to take a spade finesse. However, that requires an entry to dummy in another suit which you don't have.

You might be able to avoid a heart loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♥A. There are a couple of problems with that idea, however. First, there is no immediate entry to dummy so that you can lead a heart toward the ♥K. Second, West overcalled in hearts and didn't lead one, making it very likely West holds the ♥A.

In clubs, the only way to avoid a loser is to discard a club on an extra winner in dummy. You could discard a club on dummy's ♦K, but you have the same problem that there isn't a sure entry to dummy.

So it appears you will need spades to behave if you are to make the contract.

Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦Q. You play low from dummy, East plays low, and you win the first trick with the ♦A.

You are now at the critical point in the play. With no entry to dummy, it appears you need the defenders' spades to divide 2-2 or for one defender to have the singleton ♠Q.

Let's see what will happen if you rely on that. Suppose you play the ♠A. Both defenders follow with low spades. So much for the hope of a singleton ♠Q. That would have allowed you to use the ♠10 to get to dummy and make an overtrick by discarding a loser on the ♦K. You continue with the ♠K. Unfortunately, West shows out, discarding a club. The defenders' spades have divided 3-1 and East still has the ♠Q.

The only chance remaining is that you can get the opponents to lead a diamond, or perhaps a heart. You play the ♣A and both defenders follow with low clubs. You continue with the ♣K. Again, both defenders follow suit. You continue with a third round of clubs. If West wins this trick, you will be okay. West will have to lead either a heart or a diamond. However, it is East who wins the trick. Too bad.

East leads a heart, and you give it your last try by playing the ♥K. As you expected, West wins the ♥A.

You still have a heart and a spade to lose, so 4♠ is down one. You lost a spade, two hearts, and a club. Too bad you could never reach dummy.

Or could you?

Let's go back.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♦Q, and you win the first trick with the ♦A.

With four potential losers, it would be nice if you could reach dummy so you could make use of the ♦K. Is there any way to do that other than hoping the ♠Q falls on the first round of the suit?

One possibility is to lead a low spade toward dummy, hoping West holds the ♠Q. Whether or not West takes the ♠Q, you will then reach dummy with the ♠10. However, that's only a 50% chance. Is there a better option?

Yes. Lead the ♠J out of your hand!

What can the defenders do?

If they win the ♠Q, then dummy's ♠10 will be the entry to dummy that you need. If they don't win the ♠Q, then you can continue with the ♠A-K and they won't get a spade trick as long as the spades are divided no worse than 3-1.

When you lead the ♠J, West follows with a low spade and East wins the ♠Q. The spades haven't divided 4-0, so everything should be okay. West switches to a low heart. You try the ♥K, but West wins the ♥A, as you expected. West takes a trick with the ♥Q. That's the third trick for the defense.

West leads a club, and you win the ♣K. You can finally get to dummy with the ♠10. West shows out, but you draw one of East's remaining trumps. Now that you have an entry to dummy, you can take the ♦K and discard your club loser. You get back to your hand by ruffing a diamond. You draw East's last trump.

You have the rest of the tricks, making the 4♠ contract. You lost a spade and two hearts, but no club tricks.

## Summary

Here is the full layout.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T4<br>♥ 76<br>♦ K6432<br>♣ 8743</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 8<br>♥ AQT95<br>♦ QJT8<br>♣ T65</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q93<br>♥ J842<br>♦ 975<br>♣ QJ9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ7652<br>♥ K3<br>♦ A<br>♣ AK2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

By playing the ♠J at trick two, you virtually guarantee the contract if the defenders' spades are divided 2-2 or 3-1. On the actual deal, East has no winning play. If East wins the ♠Q, you reach dummy with the ♠10; if East doesn't take it, East loses the spade trick.

If the spades are 4-0 with West holding all four spades and West refuses to win the ♠Q, then you can continue by taking the ♠A-K and ♣A-K. You can then put West on lead with the ♠Q. If West has only hearts and diamonds remaining, whatever West leads will give you the contract.

If East has all four spades and makes the mistake of winning the ♠Q when you lead the ♠J, you will still make the contract. Only if East holds all four spades and refuses to win the ♠Q will you be defeated. If that's the case... hopefully, the next deal will be more to your liking.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/19)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/16)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/19#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.