---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-19'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/19'

next: false
---

# 2024-12-20

On this deal, can partner count on your help to take the established winners?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q62<br>♥ QJT6<br>♦ 753<br>♣ A75</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South and neither side is vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens 1NT, 15-17 points. Your partner, North, passes, and East responds 3NT. You have your first opportunity to make a call.

With a balanced hand and only 9 high-card points, you don't have anything to think about.

West and partner also pass, ending the auction. Partner is now on lead against West's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♠5, and East puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 98<br>♥ K72<br>♦ AQJ<br>♣ JT862</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q62<br>♥ QJT6<br>♦ 753<br>♣ A75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Dummy has 12 points - 11 high-card points and 1 length point for the five-card club suit. Facing an opening 1NT showing 15-17 points, responder knows there are at least 27 points between the two hands, enough for game. With no four- or five-card major, raising to 3NT is a clear choice.

Declarer plays the ♠8 from dummy. Before playing to this trick, what do you know about the spade suit?

With no help from the auction, partner has presumably led fourth best from the longest and strongest suit. In that case, you can apply the Rule of Eleven. Subtract the card partner led, the ♠5, from 11, and the result - 6 - is the number of spades higher than the ♠5 in the other three hands. Dummy has two higher cards, the ♠9 and ♠8. You have two higher, the ♠Q and ♠6. That means declarer also has two spades higher than the ♠5. Having gathered this information, what are you playing to this trick?

You play the ♠Q, following the guideline of third hand high. You are doing your best to win the trick for your side or at least try to promote the high cards in partner's hand by forcing declarer to use the ♠A or ♠K. Declarer plays the ♠4, so your wins the trick. What are you playing next?

It looks as though partner has found the opponents' weakness. It appears best to follow the guideline of returning partner's suit, helping partner to establish spade winners. With two spades remaining, you return the top of the doubleton, the ♠6. Declarer wins the ♠A as partner follows with the ♠3 and dummy with the ♠9. What is going on in spades?

Partner led a fourth best ♠5 but then followed with a lower-ranking card, the 43. That means partner started with at least five spades. Since you have the ♠2, partner has no more lower-ranking spades, so partner must have started with exactly five. Two rounds have been played, so there are three spades left in partner's hand and one in declarer's hand. Who has the ♠K?

Likely declarer.

With three spades headed by only the ♠A, declarer would presumably have held up twice, hoping to run you out of spades. So it looks as though declarer held up winning the first trick with a holding of ♠A-K-4. If you are wrong, however, partner's spades are now established as winners.

Declarer leads the ♦9. Partner follows with the ♦6, and dummy's ♦J wins the trick as you follow with the ♦3. Declarer then leads the ♣J. You must make a critical decision. Should you play high or low?

The general guideline in this situation is second hand low. Let's see what will happen on this deal if you follow the guideline. Suppose you play a low club. Declarer also plays low and partner wins the ♣K. Partner continues with another spade, and this drives out declarer's ♠K. You were correct in your deduction that declarer likely held both the ♠A and ♠K. Partner's remaining spades are now established as winners.

Declarer leads the ♣Q and you win the ♣A. You would like to get to partner's hand. You lead the ♥Q. However, declarer wins with the ♥A.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks with the established clubs and the diamond and heart winners. Declarer has made the 3NT contract with an overtrick.

Could you have done any better?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Defense

Partner has led the ♠5, and your ♠Q wins the trick as declarer follows with a low spade. When you lead back the ♠6, declarer wins the ♠A. Declarer leads the ♦9 to dummy's ♦J.

Next, when declarer leads the from dummy, you already have some clues available. It looks as though partner started with five spades, but they aren't yet established since declarer still has the ♠K. If you play a low club and partner can win the trick, partner can establish the spades by driving out the ♠K, but will partner have an entry to regain the lead?

No!

Declarer has shown about 15-17 points. Dummy started with 11 high-card points. You started with 9 high-card points. Since there are only 40 high-card points in the deck, that leaves partner with only about 3-5 points. Since you are assuming partner has the ♠J, that leaves only 2-4 points. If partner holds the ♣K or ♣Q, partner can't have an entry in another suit. So it is up to you to use your entry first to establish partner's spades. Then, if partner has an entry in clubs, partner will be able to take the spade winners.

So you should immediately win the ♣A!

If declarer has both the ♣K and ♣Q, it won't do any good to hold up winning the ♣A anyway. Declarer and partner follow with low clubs. You return your last spade, and declarer wins the ♠K, as you expected. Partner's remaining spades are now established as winners.

Declarer doesn't have enough tricks without establishing the club suit. Declarer leads the ♣Q, and partner wins the ♣K. That's the card you were hoping partner held as an entry. Partner can now take both the winning spades. That's five tricks for the defense.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but 3NT is down one. Your side got two club tricks and three spade tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ JT753<br>♥ 53<br>♦ 8642<br>♣ K4</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK4<br>♥ A984<br>♦ KT9<br>♣ Q93</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 98<br>♥ K72<br>♦ AQJ<br>♣ JT862</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q62<br>♥ QJT6<br>♦ 753<br>♣ A75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Third hand high and second hand low are guidelines dating back to the game of Whist, the ancestor of bridge. Although these guidelines are often helpful, you can't just rely on guidelines to tell you what you should play. There is no substitute for detective work - counting points and suits, and drawing inferences.

On this deal, you need to visualize the layout of the spade suit and also determine that you will need partner to have something in clubs to defeat the contract. If partner holds the ♥A, for example, the contract can't be defeated since declarer will have at least two spade tricks, three diamonds, and four clubs.

Doing all the detective work on every hand is challenging. That's one of the benefits of doing exercises like this deal. Once you get into the habit of playing detective, it will become easier when you are actually playing at the table.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/20)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/17)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/20#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.