---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-22'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/22'

next:
  text: '2024-12-24'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/24'
---

# 2024-12-23

In this column, can you find the missing queen?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A93<br>♥ T32<br>♦ AJ6<br>♣ KQJ3</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South with both sides vulnerable. North is the dealer and passes. East also passes. It's your first opportunity to make a call.

There are 15 high-card points and the hand is balanced. Ideal for an opening bid of 1NT, showing 15-17 points.

West passes. Partner raises to 2NT. East passes and the auction is back to you.

Playing standard methods, partner's raise to 2NT is invitational, showing about 8 or 9 points. With a minimum for the 1NT opening, you can reject the invitation by passing.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now declarer in 2NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>3♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♦</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>5♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>6♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>6♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥4. Dummy comes down with a balanced hand hand and 8 high-card points.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K54<br>♥ Q95<br>♦ KT5<br>♣ T974</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A93<br>♥ T32<br>♦ AJ6<br>♣ KQJ3</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You need eight tricks in 2NT.

In a notrump contract, begin making your plan by counting the sure winners you have. There are two sure spade winners, your ♠A and dummy's ♠K. There are no sure heart winners since the opponents hold the ♥A, ♥K, and ♥J. There are no immediate club winners since the opponents hold the ♣A. There are two sure diamond winners, your ♦A and dummy's ♦K. That's a total of four sure winners: two spades and two diamonds. You need to find four more tricks to make the contract.

West has led a heart and you might be able to get a heart trick, depending on what holding West has led from. If West holds the ♥A and ♥K, you can win a trick with dummy's ♥Q. If West has led from a holding headed by the ♥A-J or ♥K-J, you can get a trick by playing low from dummy, forcing East to win with a high honor. Since the odds are 2-1 in favor of West holding the ♥A-J or ♥K-J rather than the ♥A-K, it seems best to play low from dummy.

The club suit can provide three tricks through promotion by driving out the ♣A.

The diamond suit might provide an extra trick with the help of a finesse. There is a two-way finesse for the missing ♦Q. So you will need to guess which defender holds the ♦Q unless the defenders lead the suit for you.

So you can get three of the tricks you need from the club suit. You have to hope the fourth trick will come from a fortunate lie in the heart suit or guessing which defender holds the ♦Q.

Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥4. Going with odds, you play low from dummy. Unfortunately, East wins the ♥J. Should you have tried dummy's ♥Q?

No. East takes a trick with the ♥A, so you couldn't have guessed hearts correctly. East leads another heart and West wins the ♥K as dummy's ♥Q falls. At least West didn't start with a five-card heart suit. West takes a trick with the defenders' last heart. You discard spades from both hands as East also discards an encouraging-looking spade.

West shifts to the ♠J. You choose to win with the ♠A in your hand. Time to establish the club winners. You lead the ♣K and East wins the ♣A. That promotes three of the winners you need.

East leads a spade, driving out dummy's ♠K as West follows with a low spade.

You still need to decide what to do in the diamond suit, but that can wait while you take the established club winners. You take a trick with the ♣10 as both defenders follow with low clubs. You take another club winner and East discards a diamond as West follows with the defenders' last club. When you take the last club, West discards the ♠10 and East the ♠Q. Both defenders are holding on to their diamonds.

It's time to guess the diamonds. Suppose you decide to play a diamond to dummy's ♦K. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. You lead a diamond from dummy and East follows with another low diamond. You decide to finesse the ♦J. Unfortunately, it loses to West's ♦Q.

West leads a diamond and you win the last trick, but the contract has gone down one. You mis-guessed which defender held the ♦Q.

Should you have guessed correctly?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥5. You go with the odds, playing a low heart from dummy, but East wins the ♥J. So much for the chance in the heart suit. It looks as though you are going to have to find the ♦Q and also hope the defenders can't take five heart winners to go with their ♣A.

Since you need to guess which defender holds the ♦Q, it's a good idea to keep track of the defenders' high cards and distribution. So far, East has shown up with one point, the ♥J.

East continues with the ♥A, winning the second trick. East has now shown up with 5 high-card points. East leads another heart and West wins the ♥K. The good news is West started with only four hearts, so you will have a chance to make the contract if you can find the ♦Q. You also note West has shown up with 3 high-card points.

West takes a trick with the last heart. You discard spades from both hands as East discards an encouraging-looking ♠8. West switches to the ♠J. You choose to win in your hand with the ♠A. The is a fourth high-card point for West. Also, it looks as though East holds the ♠Q, giving East another 2 high-card points.

The first job is to establish the club winners you need. You lead the ♣K and East wins the ♣A. That's another 4 high-card points for East.

East leads a spade, driving out dummy's ♠K and establishing the defenders' remaining spades as winners. No need to guess the ♦Q yet. You can take the three established club winners, watching for any further clues from the opponents. West follows twice more and then discards a spade. East follows once and then discards a diamond and the ♠Q - a card you knew East held from the earlier play.

It's time to guess which defender holds the ♦Q. West has shown up with four hearts, three spades, and three clubs, so presumably holds three diamonds. East has shown up with three hearts, four spades, and two clubs, and presumably started with four diamonds. Based on the distribution, the odds slightly favor East holding the ♦Q, 4-3. However, we've also been tracking the high cards held by each defender. West has shown up with 4 high-card points: the ♥K and ♠J. East has shown up with 11 high-card points: the ♥A-J, ♠Q, and ♣A.

Why is that significant?

Recall the auction. East passed originally. If East also held the ♦Q, that would be 13 high-card points, enough to open the bidding.

So that places the ♦Q in West's hand!

Confident West holds the ♦Q, you start by playing the ♦A. You continue with the ♦J. West plays low, but you play the ♦10 from dummy. East follows with a low diamond. You have found the ♦Q.

You have the last trick with dummy's ♦K. You've made the 2NT contract with two spades, three clubs, and three diamonds. The opponents couldn't hide the ♦Q from you.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K54<br>♥ Q95<br>♦ KT5<br>♣ T974</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ JT6<br>♥ K874<br>♦ Q84<br>♣ 862</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q872<br>♥ AJ6<br>♦ 9732<br>♣ A5</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A93<br>♥ T32<br>♦ AJ6<br>♣ KQJ3</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As declarer, when you need to know the location of particular card in the defenders' hands, you need to pay attention to the auction and the cards you see during the play. Sometimes the defenders' distribution will provide the clue you need. Sometimes the defenders' high-card holding will provide the clue you need.

On this deal, the defenders do well to each hold on to three diamonds when you have guess how to play the suit. The key comes from East's pass during the auction and watching the high cards with which East shows up.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/23)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/21)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/23#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.