---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-23'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/23'

next: false
---

# 2024-12-24

In today's deal, what's the best suit for the partnership?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 54<br>♥ K62<br>♦ T986<br>♣ AK97</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 1♠. You must decide what call to make.

You have 10 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton spade when considering a takeout double. That's still not quite enough to double, especially when your side is vulnerable. You pass.

West makes an invitational limit raise to 3♠, showing four-card spade support and about 10-12 points. Your partner, North, passes, and East accepts the invitation by bidding 4♠. You have another chance to make a call.

You certainly have nothing to say at this level. You pass.

West and partner also pass, ending the auction. You now have to choose the opening lead against East's 4♠ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

You have two club winners and a possible heart winner, so it looks as though you may only need to find one more trick from partner to defeat the contract.

With no particular information from the auction, you have a clear-cut opening lead. When you have an unbid suit headed by the ace-king, you'd need a very good reason to lead another suit. You expect to win the first trick and have a look at dummy and partner's play before having to decide what to do at trick two.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♣A, top of your touching honors, and West puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT86<br>♥ QT85<br>♦ K543<br>♣ T</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 54<br>♥ K62<br>♦ T986<br>♣ AK97</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The appearance of the singleton club in dummy is a disappointment. It looks as though you are likely to get only one club trick. At least it looks as though your ♥K is a potential winner since the ♥A isn't in dummy.

The singleton ♣10 is played from dummy, partner plays the ♣J, and declarer follows with the ♣5. You've won the first trick.

You are immediately faced with a critical decision. What are you playing to trick two?

With no more clubs in dummy, one possibility is to lead a trump, hoping to remove dummy's trumps so you can later get another club trick. Here, however, that's likely to be ineffective. Declarer has at least five spades and dummy has four. Even if you were able to lead trumps twice, dummy would still remain with two spades to ruff declarer's club losers.

Continuing with another club doesn't look very attractive. Not only can declarer ruff in dummy, you might help establish the ♣Q as a winner for declarer. So it looks to be either hearts or diamonds.

With the ♥Q in dummy, leading away from the ♥K looks dangerous. If declarer has the ♥A, declarer may win dummy's ♥Q and you may never get a trick with your ♥K.

Leading a diamond looks much safer. You have a solid sequence, so you are unlikely to be giving declarer any tricks to which declarer is not already entitled. Also, it might help partner. If partner holds the ♦A-Q, for example, partner can't lead diamonds without giving away a trick.

So let's see what will happen if you shift to a diamond at trick two. Suppose you shift to the ♦10, top of your solid sequence in diamonds. A low diamond is played from dummy, partner plays a low diamond, and declarer wins the ♦A. That looks okay. Declarer was entitled to that trick anyway. Declarer continues with the ♦Q, winning the trick as you and partner follow with low diamonds again. That's not so good but, again, it was a trick declarer was going to get anyway. Your diamond lead didn't give anything away.

Declarer leads the ♠Q. That gives you a moment of hope as you play low and so does dummy. However, the wins as partner follows with a low spade. Declarer obviously holds the ♠K. Declarer plays a low spade to dummy's ♠A. Both you and partner follow with low spades. Looks like declarer has taken care of drawing trumps.

Declarer takes a trick with dummy's ♦K. Partner follows with the ♦J as declarer discards a low heart. You follow with a low diamond. At least you can stop declarer from getting any more diamond tricks.

At this point, declarer claims the contract, conceding a couple of heart tricks to the defense. That's too bad.

Should you have defended differently?

Let's go back to the first trick.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♣A, winning the first trick as the ♣10 is played from dummy, partner plays the ♣J, and declarer follows with the ♣5.

Before looking at your hand and the dummy to decide what to do at trick two, you should consider why partner played the ♣J on this trick.

Could it be a singleton?

No!

That would mean declarer started with seven clubs. So partner had a choice of clubs to play to the first trick and chose a high club. Why would partner do that?

Seeing the singleton club in dummy, partner knows you will have to decide what to do at trick two. So partner's play to this trick is a suit preference signal. Partner is suggesting which suit you should lead at trick two. Partner knows your likely choice will be between leading a heart and leading a diamond. By playing the highest card partner can afford, partner is suggesting that you switch to the higher-ranking of the two suits, hearts. If partner had a distinct preference for diamonds, partner would play the lowest-ranking club, showing a preference for the lower-ranking suit. If partner had no preference, or equal preference, partner would play a middle-ranking club, leaving it to you to decide what to do next.

Even though it looks dangerous from your perspective, you should go along with partner's suggestion and lead a heart.

Holding three hearts headed by an honor, you lead a low heart, showing interest in seeing the suit continued. With no interest in hearts yourself, you would shift to a high heart, top of nothing.

Declarer plays a low heart from dummy, and partner plays the ♥J. That wins the trick as declarer follows with a low heart. Success! You've shifted to the best suit for the partnership. Partner now takes a trick with the ♥A. Declarer follows with another heart. That's the third trick for the defense. Partner leads another heart and declarer follows again! You win the ♥K. Your side has taken the first four tricks.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but that's okay. You've defeated the 4♠ contract.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 32<br>♥ AJ7<br>♦ J72<br>♣ J8432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT86<br>♥ QT85<br>♦ K543<br>♣ T</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KQJ97<br>♥ 943<br>♦ AQ<br>♣ Q65</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 54<br>♥ K62<br>♦ T986<br>♣ AK97</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When you lead an ace against a suit contract and a singleton arrives in dummy, partner is expected to give a suit preference signal. Partner is aware that you are going to have to decide what to do next. Occasionally, the best defense will be to continue the suit despite the void in dummy or to shift to a trump to cut down on the number of times declarer can ruff the suit in dummy. Most of the time, however, the partnership will want to switch to one of the two other "obvious" suits - not the trump suit and not the singleton suit.

On this deal, partner has a clear preference for you to shift to a heart rather than a diamond. So partner plays the highest card in clubs that partner can afford, showing interest in the higher-ranking suit, hearts. With no preference, partner would have played a middle-ranking club. Then it would be up to you to decide the best continuation, perhaps a passive diamond lead, hoping to give nothing away.

Defense is a partnership activity. On this deal, you can congratulate partner on the helpful signal. Hopefully, you would have done the same thing if the roles were reversed.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/24)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/20)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/24#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.