---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-25'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/25'

next: false
---

# 2024-12-26

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A93<br>♥ T32<br>♦ AJ6<br>♣ KQJ3</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make in first position.

You have a perfectly balanced hand with 17 high-card points, ideal for a 1NT opening bid when the partnership range is 15-17 points.

West passes, and partner, North, raises to 6NT. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

You have nothing more to say. Partner has decided the partnership belongs in a small slam contract in notrump.

West also passes, and you are now the declarer in 6NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>6NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣J, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QT5<br>♥ AKJ<br>♦ A532<br>♣ K42</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ9<br>♥ 632<br>♦ QJ7<br>♣ AQ7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has a balanced hand with 17 points, about what you can expect for a raise to 6NT.

As declarer, you start by counting the number of tricks you have. You have four sure spade tricks, the ♠A, ♠K, ♠Q, and the ♠J. You have two sure heart tricks, the ♥A and ♥K. There are three sure club tricks, the ♣A, ♣K, and ♣Q. You start with only one sure diamond trick, the ♦A. That's ten tricks and you need to develop two more to make the contract.

You aren't going to get any more tricks from spades or clubs than the seven tricks you already have. So your focus is going to have to be on getting the two extra tricks from hearts and diamonds.

The heart suit offers the opportunity for one extra trick with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♥Q. That's a 50% chance.

The diamond suit offers a chance for both the extra tricks you need. Even if you lose a trick to the ♦K, you will have promoted one extra diamond trick. If the six missing diamonds are divided 3-3, you will get a second trick through length.

So your plan should be to start with the diamond suit. If it provides both the tricks you need, that's fine. If it provides only one extra trick, then you can fall back on the heart suit for the second trick.

Is there any more to the play than that?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣J. With lots of entries between the two hands, let's suppose you choose to win the first trick in your hand with the ♣Q. Now what?

Since you want to play the diamonds before falling back on the heart finesse, you want to start with the diamond finesse. You are at a critical point in the play. How are you planning to play the diamonds?

It may seem that you can lead one of your diamond honors to try to trap the ♦K if it is with West. Let's see what will happen if that's what you do. Suppose you play the ♦Q at trick two. West plays low, you play low from dummy, and East wins the ♦K. Too bad. The finesse lost, but at least you promoted the ♦J as a winner.

West returns a club, and let's suppose you win the ♣A. You can now test to see if the defenders' diamonds were originally divided 3-3. If that's the case, you won't need the heart finesse. Both defenders follow suit when you play the ♦J. You lead another diamond, but West shows out. You win dummy's ♦A, but East still has a high diamond remaining. The defenders' diamonds have divided 4-2.

Now you are going to have to try your last chance, the heart finesse. It can't hurt to take one of dummy's high hearts first, just in case there is a singleton ♥Q. However, both defenders follow with low hearts. You might take your last club winner and four spade winners before trying the heart finesse, but let's shorten the play a little. Suppose you cross to your hand with a spade. You lead a heart and, when West follows with a low heart, you try dummy's ♥J.

Unfortunately, this isn't your day. East wins the ♥Q. Worse, East now takes a trick with the high diamond. You probably should have taken all your other winners, leaving the heart finesse until the end.

6NT has gone down two tricks. It seems a little unlucky that both the diamond and heart finesses lost and the diamonds failed to break 3-3.

Could you have done something differently?

You needed to take a different finesse!

Let's go back and see how the play should go.

## Recommended Play

West leads a club and you win the first trick.

You want to take a diamond finesse, but you don't want to do it by leading a diamond honor from your hand.

That can never work. If West does have the ♦K, West can cover and force you to win the ♦A. You'll have a second diamond winner but, since you don't have the ♦10, you will need the diamonds to divide 3-3 to get an extra trick from the suit. So leading the ♦Q and ♦J from your hand can never gain whether West or East holds the ♦K. Instead, you should be leading toward the cards you hope will win tricks, the ♦Q and ♦J.

Let's see why that works much better on the actual deal. To lead a diamond toward your hand, you can cross to dummy with a spade. Of course, you could also have simply won the first club trick in dummy. You lead a low diamond from dummy and, when East follows with a low diamond, you play the ♦J. This wins the trick as West follows with a low diamond. Your finesse is a success! East must hold the ♦K. You get back to dummy with another spade. You lead another low diamond from dummy, and this time, East elects to win the ♦K. You play a low diamond from your hand.

East returns a club, and you win the ♣A. Now you can take a trick with the ♦Q. You cross to dummy with a heart. No need to take a finesse, you don't need it! You take a trick with dummy's ♦A, discarding a low heart from your hand. That's your third diamond trick.

You have the rest of the tricks, with a club winner, a heart winner, and two spade winners. You've made the slam, getting four spade tricks, two heart tricks, three club tricks, and three diamond tricks.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QT5<br>♥ AKJ<br>♦ A532<br>♣ K42</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 874<br>♥ T854<br>♦ T6<br>♣ JT96</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 632<br>♥ Q97<br>♦ K984<br>♣ 853</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ9<br>♥ 632<br>♦ QJ7<br>♣ AQ7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

It's important to see that the best way to play the diamond suit for three tricks is to lead low toward the ♦Q and the ♦J. You are going to get three tricks whenever East holds the ♦K, no matter how the defenders' diamonds are divided. If West holds the ♦K and captures one of your diamond honors, then you still have the chance that the diamond suit is divided 3-3. If that doesn't work, you can finally fall back on the heart finesse. Playing the contract this way, the odds of making the slam are about 85%.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/26)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/23)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/26#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.