---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-26'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/26'

next:
  text: '2024-12-28'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/28'
---

# 2024-12-27

On this deal, you have three straightforward possibilities to eliminate a loser. Will that be good enough?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ964<br>♥ K43<br>♦ 63<br>♣ KJ5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. You have to decide what call to make in first chair.

You have 12 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. Although the hand is balanced, it is too weak to open 1NT. Simply start with the five-card major.

West overcalls 2♦. Partner, North, cuebids 3♦. East then advances to 4♦. You have to decide what to do after this turn of events.

You have a minimum opening bid so, if East had passed, you would reject partner's invitation by returning to 34. Now that East has competed to the four level, you can pass to show a minimum hand.

West passes. Partner, however, now bids 4♠. East passes, and the auction is back to you again.

Partner presumably has better than just an invitational raise. You still have nothing extra, so you pass.

West also passes. The auction is over, and you are the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♦</td>
		<td>4♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦A, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QT53<br>♥ AQ52<br>♦ 75<br>♣ A84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ964<br>♥ K43<br>♦ 63<br>♣ KJ5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 12 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton diamond, enough to take the partnership to game once you open 1♠.

You must now make ten tricks and can start by considering the potential losers. How many do you have?

There is a potential spade loser since you are missing the ♠K. There are no heart losers since you have the top three hearts. There is a potential club loser since you are missing the ♣Q. There are two diamond losers, and it looks as though you are about to lose them right away since West has led the suit. So you have four potential losers and need to eliminate one.

You can hope to avoid the spade loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♠K.

Similarly, you could hope to avoid the club loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♣Q. That's better odds than playing the ♣A-K, hoping the ♣Q will fall doubleton. With only six clubs in the combined hands, the guideline eight ever, nine never applies. With eight or fewer cards, "ever" take the finesse. The odds of a straightforward finesse are 50%.

Do you have any alternative to trying the club finesse?

Yes.

If the six missing hearts in the defenders' hands are divided 3-3, dummy's fourth heart will become a winner through length. You can then discard the club loser on the heart winner. The odds of six missing cards dividing 3-3 are only 36%. So should you try for the hearts to break or try the club finesse?

Both!

You can combine the chances. You can start by trying the hearts. If that doesn't work, you can then fall back on the club finesse. That improves the odds on avoiding a club loser to about 68%. Combined with the chance that the spade finesse will work, the overall odds of making the contract are about 84%. That's pretty good.

Do you have any information from the auction about the location of the missing high cards that might help?

Not really. West overcalled during the auction and likely has most of the opponents' high cards. However, East raised during the auction, so either opponent could hold the ♠K or ♠Q. That doesn't mean you shouldn't be paying attention to the cards as they are played by the opponents. There may be some useful clues available during the play.

Let's see how the play starts off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦A. That wins the first trick as East makes an encouraging attitude signal with the ♦10. West continues with the ♦Q which wins the second trick as East finishes the encouraging high-low in diamonds. West now switches to the ♥J. Where are you winning this trick?

You want to start by drawing the defenders' trumps and that involves taking a finesse. So you can win the ♥Q in dummy as East plays the ♥9. You lead the ♠10 from dummy and, when East follows with a low spade, you play low, hoping East has the ♠K. Unfortunately, the finesse loses to West's ♠K. There goes one of your chances.

West continues with another heart, and this time, you win the ♥K. You note that East followed a second time. You want to keep track of the hearts so you will know if dummy's last heart is a winner. You play a spade to dummy's ♠Q. West follows suit, but East shows out, discarding a club. West still has a trump left. You always need to keep track of the trump suit. You continue with another spade, drawing West's last trump as East discards another club. With the defenders' trumps gone, you are at the critical point in the play. What are you playing next?

You've already determined that you have two chances to avoid a club loser, provided you try the hearts first. So it may seem that it's best to go after the hearts now. Two rounds of the suit, eight hearts, have already been played, so there are only two hearts outstanding. Let's suppose you lead your last heart at this point. Unfortunately, West shows out, discarding a diamond. The defenders' hearts have divided 4-2, with East holding four of them. There goes chance number two.

It appears you are down to your third and final chance. Let's suppose you play dummy's ♣A next. Both defenders follow with low clubs. You lead a low club from dummy, and East follows with a low club. When you finesse the ♣J, however, it loses to West's ♣Q. That's the third chance gone.

4♠ is down one. You were extremely unlucky that the hearts didn't break and both the spade and club finesses lost. It must be that 16% of the time when everything goes wrong.

Or did you miss a potential clue?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Play

The first few tricks go exactly like what we've seen. West leads the ♦A and, seeing East's encouraging signal, continues with the ♦Q. The defenders have taken the first two tricks. West switches to the ♥J, and you win the trick with dummy's ♥Q so you can be in position to take the spade finesse. You lead dummy's ♠10, but the finesse loses to West's ♠K. West continues with another heart, and you take it with the ♥K. East also follows suit a second time. You draw another round of trumps with dummy's ♠Q and find East showing out on this trick. You draw West's remaining trump.

With three tricks already lost, you need to avoid a club loser. You have two basic chances. Dummy's fourth heart may become a winner, or the club finesse might work. Is there any way to improve your chances by gathering some more clues?

Yes!

There is no hurry to test the hearts or try the club finesse. You can take the two remaining trump winners first. Who knows what information may pop up. You take one of the spade winners. West discards a diamond and East discards a club. Not too much useful information there. You take the last spade winner. You can afford to discard a low club from dummy, keeping all your chances alive. Both defenders discard diamonds on this trick. Again, not a lot of useful information. Neither defender discarded a heart or the ♣Q.

Now it's time to test the hearts. You lead your last heart to dummy's ♥A. Unfortunately, West shows out, discarding another diamond. The hearts have divided 4-2, and East still has a high heart remaining. It all seems to be down to the club finesse now. You take a trick with dummy's ♣A. Both defenders follow with low clubs. Still no ♣Q. You lead the last club from dummy. East follows with the ♣10, and you...

Hold on! There's no point in taking the club finesse.

East can't have the ♣Q. East has only one card remaining, and you know what it is!

East's last card is a heart!

East had to hold on to the heart or dummy's ♥5 would become a winner and you could use it to discard the club loser. Since East can't have the ♣Q, you...

Play the ♣K!

You are rewarded for watching the cards as West's ♣Q falls on this trick. The ♣J now wins the last trick.

You've made the 4♠ contract, losing only two diamonds and a spade, but no clubs.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QT53<br>♥ AQ52<br>♦ 75<br>♣ A84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K82<br>♥ JT<br>♦ AQJ842<br>♣ Q6</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ 9876<br>♦ KT9<br>♣ T9732</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ964<br>♥ K43<br>♦ 63<br>♣ KJ5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Whenever possible, you want to leave a key play as late as possible, trying to gather all the clues you can.

On this deal, you can afford to play the spade winners before coming down to the critical play in clubs.

There are a number of advantages to taking winners in this type of situation. First, while you are taking winners, the defenders may have to make discards. There's always the chance that they will discard the wrong cards. If not, they may still give you clues through the signals they give one another or through the cards they choose to discard.

On this deal, East had no choice but to hold on to the fourth heart to prevent dummy's fourth heart from becoming a winner. Once you have that clue available, you can determine that the club finesse isn't going to work.

You were lucky that West started with only a doubleton club, but that makes up for bad luck when the spade finesse loses and the hearts don't break 3-3.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/27)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/26)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/28)

### By Date

Use the links below.