---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-29'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/29'

next:
  text: '2024-12-31'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/31'
---

# 2024-12-30

In today's contract, is there anything to guard against?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT5<br>♥ AK942<br>♦ T7<br>♣ K75</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. You are the dealer and have to decide what call to make.

There are 13 high-card points and you can add 1 length point for the five-card heart suit, bringing the total to 14 points. That's more than enough to open the bidding at the one level in the five-card major suit, 1♥.

West passes, and partner raises to 2♥, showing at least three-card support and about 6-9 or 10 points. East passes, and you have to decide what call to make next.

You know Where you want to play the deal since there is at least an eight-card major-suit fit in hearts. Even if partner has a maximum for the raise to the two level, you will still be a little short of the combined strength needed to make game reasonable. It looks best to pass and settle for partscore.

West also passes, ending the auction. You are now the declarer in 2♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣Q. Partner puts down the dummy with 9 high-card points and three-card heart support, close to a maximum for the raise.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A96<br>♥ J63<br>♦ 9853<br>♣ A84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT5<br>♥ AK942<br>♦ T7<br>♣ K75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The first step in making a plan is to Assess the Situation. You can afford five losers and start by counting the potential losers. There is a potential heart loser since the opponents hold the ♥Q. There might be more than one loser if the five missing hearts divide 4-1 or 5-0. There will be a spade loser remaining after the ♠A and ♠K are gone. There are two diamond losers since the opponents hold all the high diamonds. There will be a club loser remaining after the ♣A and ♣K are gone. Assuming there is at most one heart loser, that's a total of only five potential losers: one heart, one spade, two diamonds, and one club. There doesn't look to be any problem making the contract.

If West started with a singleton ♥Q or either defender started with a doubleton ♥Q, the contract will be made with an overtrick. There will also be no problem if either defender started with a singleton ♥10 or the five missing hearts divide 3-2.

Is there anything else to consider?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣Q. It doesn't appear to matter where you win this trick. Let's suppose you win with the ♣K in your hand as East follows with a low club.

There's no reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. Both defenders follow with low hearts when the ♥A is played. No singleton ♥Q or ♥10, but no 5-0 split. When you play the ♥K, however, West shows out, discarding a diamond. The defenders' hearts have divided 4-1 and East now has two heart winners.

You give up a diamond trick. Perhaps the defenders will give you a chance to ruff two diamonds in your hand. West wins the ♦J. West leads a club and you win dummy's ♣A.

You lead another diamond and, this time, East wins the ♦A. East takes the defenders' established club winner. East takes a trick with the ♥Q, removing dummy's ♥J. East takes another trick with the ♥10. So much for any chance to ruff two diamonds in your hand. You discard a spade from dummy.

East switches to the ♠Q. If East also has the ♠J, you might still make this contract. You win with dummy's ♠A. You lead a spade and, when East follows with a low spade, you try finessing the ♠10. No luck. This loses to West's ♠J.

West leads a diamond and you ruff with the last trump.

You have one more trick with the ♠K, but the contract is down one. The nasty 4-1 heart break defeated the contract.

Or could you have overcome that?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣Q and you choose to win with the ♣K as East follows with a low club.

The contract is secure provided there is not more than one heart loser. That won't be a problem if the missing hearts divide 3-2 or there is a singleton ♥Q or ♥10. There is probably nothing which can be done if the missing hearts divide 5-0. So the focus should be on guarding against a 4-1 division.

Holding the ♥9, you can handle a 4-1 break with either defender holding four hearts.

Let's see. You start by taking a trick with the ♥A, or ♥K. This guards against either defender having started with a singleton ♥Q or ♥10. Both defenders follow with low hearts. No 5-0 break, so the contract is guaranteed. You now lead a low heart toward dummy's ♥J. If both defenders follow to this trick, the hearts have divided 3-2 and you can draw the remaining trump with the ♥K. West, however, shows out. The hearts have divided 4-1 with East holding the remaining three hearts, including the ♥Q and ♥10. You play dummy's ♥J and East wins with the ♥Q.

East returns a club, and you win dummy's ♣A. You can now lead dummy's remaining low heart and, when East follows with a low heart, finesse the ♥9. West discards a club. The ♥K draws East's remaining trump, the ♥10. You have lost only one heart trick despite the 4-1 break.

You have the two spade winners with dummy's ♠A and your ♠K. Your remaining heart is the eighth trick.

The defenders have the last four tricks, but you have made the contract. You lost only one heart trick to go with the spade loser, two diamond losers, and the club loser.

## Another Possible Layout

What if West were the defender holding four hearts?

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A96<br>♥ J63<br>♦ 9853<br>♣ A84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J74<br>♥ QT85<br>♦ KJ6<br>♣ QJ9</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q832<br>♥ 7<br>♦ AQ42<br>♣ T632</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT5<br>♥ AK942<br>♦ T7<br>♣ K75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

West leads the ♣Q and you win the ♣K. You play the ♥A and both defenders follow with low hearts. You lead a low heart toward dummy's ♥J.

West has no winning play. If West plays low, you will immediately win dummy's ♥J. West chooses to win the ♥Q and you play a low heart from dummy.

West leads another club and dummy's ♣A wins. You take a trick with dummy's ♥J, drawing one of East's remaining trumps. You cross to your hand with the ♠K. You draw West's remaining trump with the ♥K.

Again, you have made the contract, losing only one heart trick.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A96<br>♥ J63<br>♦ 9853<br>♣ A84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J743<br>♥ 7<br>♦ KJ62<br>♣ QJ93</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q82<br>♥ QT85<br>♦ AQ4<br>♣ T62</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT5<br>♥ AK942<br>♦ T7<br>♣ K75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When a contract looks relatively straightforward, you need to consider what might go wrong.

On this deal, there won't be a problem is the hearts divide 3-2 and there is probably nothing which can be done if they divide 5-0. So you want to focus on the possibility they are divided 4-1. By playing the ♥A and leading a low heart toward dummy's ♥J, you are able to avoid a heart loser if either defender started with four heart including the ♥Q and ♥10. You give up on the possibility of an overtrick if either defender holds the doubleton ♥Q, but that's a small price to play for guaranteeing the contract. The presence of the ♥9 is what gives you the extra chance of handling a 4-1 break when East holds four hearts.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/30)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/28)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/02)

### By Date

Use the links below.