---
prev:
  text: '2024-12-30'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/12/30'

next:
  text: '2025-01-01'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/01'
---

# 2024-12-31

In today's deal, will partner be able to take all the established winners for your side?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q842<br>♥ JT9<br>♦ K5<br>♣ J962</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens 1♣. Your partner, North, passes, and East responds 1♦. You have your first opportunity to make a call.

There are 7 high-card points and a balanced hand. With no good five-card or longer suit, you have no reason to enter the auction.

West makes a jump rebid to 2NT. This shows a balanced hand with about 18-19 points. Partner passes again, and East raises to 3NT. The auction is back to you.

Naturally, you pass.

West and partner both pass, ending the auction. Partner will be on lead against West's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♠5, and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ Q74<br>♦ AJT43<br>♣ K843</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q842<br>♥ JT9<br>♦ K5<br>♣ J962</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

East has 10 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit, more than enough to raise to game.

Although West has shown a balanced hand, East doesn't have to be balanced to play in notrump.

Declarer plays the singleton ♠6 from dummy, and you are faced with your first decision. You have to choose what to play to this trick.

Even if it is obvious what you are going to play, you should still take time to analyze what is going on in the suit. Partner has presumably led fourth best from the longest and strongest suit. Whenever partner leads the fourth highest card, you can apply the Rule of Eleven. Subtracting partner's card from eleven tells you how many higher-ranking cards are in the other three hands. 11 - 5 = 6. So there are six cards higher than the ♠5 among dummy, you, and declarer. Dummy has one higher, the ♠6, and you have two higher, the and ♠8. That leaves declarer with three cards higher than the ♠5.

In this position, the normal play is third hand high. You are hoping to help partner promote spade winners. You might even win the trick if partner holds the ♠A-K or declarer decides to hold up winning the first trick. There are always exceptions to third hand high, but this isn't one of them. You play the ♠Q and declarer wins the trick with the ♠A. From your initial analysis, you know declarer still has two cards remaining that are higher than the ♠5.

At trick two, declarer switches to the ♦Q. Partner follows with the ♦2, and the ♦3 is played from dummy. You have another decision to make. Should you win this trick?

Declarer is taking a finesse in diamonds, hoping your partner holds the ♦K. Although there are times to hold up winning in this situation, this isn't the time to hold up. Declarer presumably has lots of entries to dummy and, if you don't win this trick, you might not get a trick with your ♦K. So you win the ♦K. You have another decision to make. What are you leading to the next trick?

When defending a notrump contract, returning partner's suit is the normal action unless there is clearly something better to do. With dummy out of spades, there doesn't seem to be any reason to go against the guideline. Does it matter which spade you lead back?

Holding three low spades, it doesn't seem there is much difference which one you lead back. However, this is a situation to give your partner a count of how many spades you have remaining. It could be critical for partner to know how many declarer has left. With one spade you have no choice; with two spades, play the top of the doubleton; with three or more spades, return a low spade, your original fourth best.

Accordingly, with three spades remaining, return your lowest, the ♠2. Declarer plays the ♠9, and partner wins the ♠10 as dummy discards a low club. Partner continues with the ♠K. Hopefully, partner is taking enough spade tricks to defeat the contract. Do you have any further decisions to make?

It may not seem to make a difference what you play to this trick since partner is winning the trick no matter what you play. However, let's see what will happen if you follow with your lower remaining spade.

Suppose you play the ♠4 to this trick and declarer plays the ♠J. That's good news since that must be declarer's last high card. Partner's remaining spades must now be winners. Partner leads another spade, and your ♠8 wins the trick as declarer shows out, discarding a club. That's both good news and bad news. You won the trick, and that's the fourth trick for the defense. But what are you doing next?

It's time to look at the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ 853<br>♦ 76<br>♣ QT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ AK62<br>♦ Q98<br>♣ A7</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ Q74<br>♦ AJT4<br>♣ K8</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ JT9<br>♦ 5<br>♣ J962</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner still has a spade winner, but there is no entry to partner's hand. Whatever you lead next, declarer has the rest of the tricks, making the contract.

What went wrong?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Defense

Partner has led the ♠5. You play the ♠Q, third hand high, and declarer wins the trick with the ♠A. Declarer leads the ♦Q, playing a low diamond from dummy, and loses the trick to your ♦K. Hoping to establish winners in partner's suit, you lead back the ♠2, the lowest from three remaining spades. Declarer plays the ♠9 and partner wins with the ♠10. Partner now continues with the ♠K.

Before doing anything, you need to consider carefully which of your remaining spades to play. If partner started with a four-card spade suit, it won't matter which of your spades you play. Either partner or declarer will win the next round with the ♠J. If partner started with five spades, then declarer's last spade is falling on this trick and you don't want to be left with the high spade for your side. The suit will be blocked. In either case, it can't hurt to play the ♠8 to this trick. If partner has two more spade tricks, you will have unblocked the suit. If partner has only one more spade, your ♠8 won't be winning a trick anyway.

So, on this trick, play the ♠8. Declarer follows with the ♠J, and that's great news. Partner must have started with five spades. Partner continues with the ♠7, and you can follow with your carefully preserved ♠4. That leaves partner on lead as declarer shows out. Partner now leads the ♠3, the only remaining spade. It wins the trick as everyone discards. That's the fifth trick for the defense.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but 3NT is down one. Your side took a diamond and four spade tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT753<br>♥ 853<br>♦ 762<br>♣ QT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ9<br>♥ AK62<br>♦ Q98<br>♣ A75</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ Q74<br>♦ AJT43<br>♣ K843</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q842<br>♥ JT9<br>♦ K5<br>♣ J962</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Both declarer and the defenders need to be careful not to block a suit in which they are taking winners. That's a lot easier for declarer who can see the partnership's entire holding in the suit. Declarer usually follows the principle of playing the higher card from the short side first. It's much more challenging for the defenders who can't see each other's holding in the suit. They may have to work harder, as on this deal, to figure out exactly what is going on.

Perhaps you are thinking that it would have been easier if you returned the ♠8 right away, instead of the ♠2. You would then have unblocked the suit right away and wouldn't have to worry later. Unfortunately, you have additional priorities on defense. It is important to first tell partner that you have three spades remaining by correctly returning the ♠2. If you had led back the ♠8 instead, partner would assume you were returning the top of a doubleton. From partner's perspective, that would mean declarer started with four spades, including the ♠J. When declarer played the ♠9 and partner won the ♠10, partner would assume declarer had two spades remaining, including the ♠J. Partner would not continue with the ♠K since it would establish declarer's ♠J as a winner. Instead, partner would switch to another suit, hoping you could regain the lead to play your last spade and trap declarer's ♠J.

So you had three tasks as a defender on this deal:

- Play third hand high to help establish partner's spade suit.
- Return the ♠2 to give partner a count of the remaining spades.
- Unblock the ♠8 so partner could take two tricks with the ♠7-3.

Who said defense is easy?

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/12/31)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/24)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/12)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/07)

### By Date

Use the links below.