---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-03'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/08/03'

next:
  text: '2024-08-05'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/08/05'
---

# 2024-08-04

Today's column examines responder's options after partner opens and rebids a minor suit.

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

### Opener's Minor-Suit Rebid

After a minor-suit opening and a one-of-a-major response, opener's rebid of the minor shows a minimum opening hand of around 12-16 points and, usually, a six-card or longer suit. This is a fairly descriptive sequence, so responder will often be able to place the contract. Sometimes, though, responder will need more information from opener to decide the best contract.

### Responder has a Minimum

With a minimum-range hand of 6-10 points, responder will not want to invite game. Instead, the issue is which partscore contract to play.

Consider this South hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q7543<br>♥ A9<br>♦ J43<br>♣ 873</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♦, South responds 1♠, and North rebids 2♦. South must choose a rebid.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has 7 high-card points, plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. Opposite North's range of 12-16 points, South has no game interest. If North has three spades, there is an eight-card major-suit fit. For partscore purposes, however, safety is the primary concern. North-South have a good fit in diamonds and, if North has shortness in spades, 2♠ will be an ugly contract. South can happily pass 2♦.

Consider this variation to the previous hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT7543<br>♥ A9<br>♦ J3<br>♣ 873</td>
	</tr>
</table>

This time, South has a six-card spade suit and only two diamonds. The auction begins the same way, with East and West passing at every turn. North opens 1♦, South responds 1♠, and North rebids 2♦. It is South's turn to select a rebid.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Despite adding a spade and removing a diamond from the South hand, pass still looks like the winning call. It is possible that there is a better fit in spades than in diamonds but, even so, there is very likely an eight-card fit in diamonds. It would be risky to leave the safety of the known fit in diamonds to try to find a major-suit fit.

Here is another variation.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J87<br>♥ QJT932<br>♦ K54<br>♣ 9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South still has a six-card major, but this time the major is relatively solid. North opens 1♣, South responds 1♥, and North rebids 2♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This time, it would be dangerous for South to pass 2♣. Unless North's
clubs are strong, 2♣ could be an inadequate trump suit. South's hearts, on the other hand, are strong. Even if North is short in hearts, 2♥ should play reasonably.

2♥ is not an invitational bid, but North might bid 3♥ with three-card support and the upper end of the range of 12-16 points. In that case, South could continue on to 4♥.

Here is one last weak hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 87<br>♥ A6432<br>♦ JT983<br>♣ 7</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♣. South has only 5 high-card points but, with two five-card suits, can count 2 length points. With 7 points, South has more than enough to respond 1♥. After North rebids 2♣, South has to select a rebid.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Opposite North's 2♣ rebid, South has no interest in a game contract. Which partscore should North-South play?

2♥ or 2♦ might be the best contract, but South cannot bid 2♦ because 2♦ would be forcing and show about 11 or more points. South either has to pass 2♣ or rebid 2♥. With a weak five-card heart suit, South would be taking a big risk by bidding 2♥. Partner could have a singleton or void in hearts. Partner will not love this dummy in 2♣, but pass looks like the best choice.

### Responder has Invitational Values

With 11 or 12 points, responder has enough to invite game opposite opener's minor-suit rebid. Responder's invitational choices are:

- Raise opener's minor to the three level.
- Bid 2NT.
- Make a jump rebid in responder's major.

Consider this responding hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJT863<br>♥ A87<br>♦ J3<br>♣ 52</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♣, South responds 1♠, and North rebids 2♣. South must choose a rebid.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The 10 high-card points and 2 length points for the six-card spade suit give South an invitational hand. There is likely an eight-card club fit but, if there is a game contract, spades and notrump are the most attractive denominations. South can rebid 3♠, showing a good six-card or longer spade suit and 11-12 points.

North can pass 3♠ with 12-13 points or bid again - 3NT, 4♣, or 4♠ perhaps - with 14-16 points.

Here is a different South hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ873<br>♥ QJ4<br>♦ T6<br>♣ K53</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South still has enough strength to invite game, but this time, South has only five spades. North opens 1♦, South responds 1♠, and North rebids 2♦. How should South continue?

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has one spade too few to rebid 3♠, but with a balanced hand and stoppers in hearts and clubs, South can rebid 2NT. This call is invitational, showing 11-12 points.

With a bare minimum, North can pass 2NT or rebid 3♦, to play there. With enough strength to accept the invitation, North will usually bid 3NT. With three spades, though, North will bid 3♠ "on the way" to 3NT, allowing South to bid 4♠ with a five-card suit.

Here is one final invitational hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 762<br>♥ QJ43<br>♦ A98<br>♣ KJ7</td>
	</tr>
</table>

The auction begins familiarly. North opens 1♣, South responds 1♥, and North rebids 2♣. South must choose a rebid.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has 11 points and notrump-oriented distribution.

The problem with 2NT, though, is the lack of a spade stopper. 3NT may not be the right game contract and, if it is, North might need to be the declarer to protect a spade stopper. Consider if North has the K-3, and is dummy, a spade opening lead will come through the ♠K. North will only win a trick if West holds the ♠A. If North is declarer, North always wins one spade trick after a spade lead. Instead of 2NT, South can raise to 3♣, showing an invitational hand and club support.

North can pass with a bare minimum of 12-13 points or continue on with 14-16 points. North's third bid will help South choose between 3NT and 5♣.

### Responder has Game-Going Values

With 13 points or more, responder will commit the partnership to game and must be careful not to make a non-forcing bid until a game contract is reached.

If responder knows the partnership should play in game and in which
denomination it belongs, responder can simply place the contract.

Consider this South hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQJ<br>♥ AT73<br>♦ T93<br>♣ QJ2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens the bidding 1♦, South responds 1♥, and North rebids 2♦. South must choose a rebid.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With 13 points, South knows How High the partnership belongs, game. North's failure to raise hearts means North-South have no eight-card major-suit fit. With a balanced hand and stoppers in both unbid suits, South also knows Where North-South should play, notrump. There is no need to probe for alternative contracts. South can simply place the contract with a rebid of 3NT.

Often, responder won't know exactly Where the partnership belongs.

Consider this South hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ983<br>♥ AQ43<br>♦ 52<br>♣ K9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♦. With 13 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit, South knows the partnership belongs in at least game, but that may be in notrump, spades, hearts, or even diamonds. South responds 1♠ for now. North rebids 2♦, leaving South to choose a rebid.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

North could have three spades or even four hearts. North could not rebid 2♥ with a minimum-range hand because 2♥ would be a reverse, showing 17 points or more. If North does not have a fit for either major, North-South probably belongs in 3NT.

South can explore all of these possibilities by rebidding 2♥. Bidding a new suit after opener's minor-suit rebid is forcing, showing at least an invitational hand of 11 points or more.

North will bid 2♠ with three spades or raise to 3♥ with four hearts. If North makes a different rebid, South can suggest playing game in notrump by bidding 3NT.

Occasionally, responder will have a good enough hand for the partnership to go to game, but no good descriptive rebid available.

Here is an example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A9763<br>♥ 42<br>♦ KQJ<br>♣ KJ2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♣, South responds 1♠, and North rebids 2♣. South knows North-South belongs in a game contract, but which game contract?

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The best game could be 3NT, 4♠, or 5♣, depending on North's distribution and whether North holds a heart stopper. South would like to raise clubs, allowing North to support spades, bid notrump, or continue on to 5♣. However, a raise to 3♣ is not forcing. South wants to ensure the partnership reaches game. Raising to 4♣ would go beyond 3NT, which could easily be the best contract. South also can't rebid 3NT, which wouldn't give the partnership a chance to reach 4♠ or 5♣ when one of those contracts is best.

South can try 2♦ instead. Normally, a new suit by responder shows four or more cards in the suit, but South has no other convenient forcing bid.

If North then bids 2♠ or 2NT, South will be able to bid game in that denomination. If North raises to 3♦, South can go back to clubs and hope that 5♣ makes.

### Summary

When opener bids and rebids a minor suit, responder will usually be the "captain" of the auction. Often, responder will know exactly where the partnership belongs and can place the contract. If opener's input is needed, responder can invite by bidding 2NT, three of opener's minor or three of responder's major. Or responder can make a forcing bid by bidding a new suit.

## Questions

### 01

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT95<br>♥ AJ2<br>♦ KQ8<br>♣ J52</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3NT**

You have 13 points and only four spades, so there is no eight-card major-suit fit. With stoppers in both unbid suits and a balanced hand, it looks like 3NT is the best game. There is no reason to mess around with other calls, just bid it!

### 02

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K4<br>♥ AQT952<br>♦ J3<br>♣ 843</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3♥**

With 10 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit, you have enough strength to invite game. Jumping to 3♥ describes this hand perfectly: 11-12 points and a strong six-card or longer heart suit.

### 03

You are South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT954<br>♥ KQ32<br>♦ A8<br>♣ 92</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♥**

You could have an eight-card fit in either major, so jumping to 3NT would be premature. Instead, you can bid 2♥, which is forcing. If North supports hearts or spades, you can play game in that suit. Otherwise, you can bid 3NT.

### 04

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ643<br>♥ Q9652<br>♦ 73<br>♣ 8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass**

With only 6 high-card points plus 2 length points, you do not have enough strength to invite game. There may be a better fit in one of the majors than in clubs, but it is too dangerous to bid 2♥. 2♥ is forcing and could get the partnership too high. Pass and hope partner can make 2♣.

### 05

You are South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT4<br>♥ QJ853<br>♦ AT2<br>♣ Q2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2NT**

You have 12 points, enough to invite game. With a balanced hand and stoppers in spades and diamonds, 2NT is a good description. With three-card heart support, North can bid 3♥ over 2NT, locating an eight-card fit.

### 06

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J4<br>♥ KT762<br>♦ 752<br>♣ QT3</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass**

You have a good fit for clubs, but no game interest. It is usually preferable to play game in a major or notrump instead of a minor but, for a partscore contract, a minor-suit fit is perfectly acceptable.

### 07

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJT942<br>♥ K92<br>♦ 3<br>♣ 874</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♠**

You have 7 high-card points, plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit, so you do not have interest in game. With six strong spades and a low singleton diamond, 2♠ will probably be a better contract than 2♦. 2♠ is not invitational. It shows a minimum responding hand of about 6-10 points.

### 08

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT82<br>♥ 763<br>♦ Q93<br>♣ AQ4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3♦**

With 11 points, you have a game-invitational hand. You have notrump-oriented distribution but, with no heart stopper, it isn't clear notrump is the best contract or that notrump should be declared by South. You can raise to 3♦, invitational, and let partner make the next move.

### 09

You are South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 73<br>♥ Q96432<br>♦ K98<br>♣ J5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass (2♥)**

With this distribution you might bid 2♥, but your hearts are weak. There is no guarantee of a heart fit and, if North has a singleton or void in hearts, the play in 2♥ will not be pretty. It is much safer to pass and play in clubs, which will usually be an eight-card or longer fit.

### 10

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKJ<br>♥ KJ732<br>♦ Q52<br>♣ 93</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♠**

South does not have enough information to select the final contract. 3NT, 4♥, or 5♦ could all be the best contract, depending on North's distribution. There is no convenient forcing bid available, but you can try 2♠, bidding your strong three-card suit. Hopefully, North will rebid 2NT, showing a club stopper, or 3♥, showing three hearts.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/08/04)

### By Category

[<Badge type="info" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/04#links)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/08)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/07)

### By Date

Use the links below.