---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-07'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/08/07'

next:
  text: '2024-08-09'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/08/09'
---

# 2024-08-08

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J93<br>♥ AT975<br>♦ AKJ<br>♣ K9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

You have 16 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. Although you have a five-card major, the hand is balanced and falls in the 15-17 point range for opening 1NT. 1NT is the best choice with this hand. If you open 1♥, you will have to worry about what to rebid if partner responds 1♠.

West passes, and partner, North, responds 2♣. East passes, and you have to choose a rebid.

Partner's 2♣ bid is the Stayman convention, asking whether you have a four-card or longer major suit. You get to show your heart suit. The 2♥ reply shows four or five hearts.

West passes, and partner raises to 4♥. East passes, and you have another chance to make a call.

Partner's raise to 4♥ is a signoff bid. Partner has decided Where the partnership belongs, hearts. Partner has also decided How High, game. Since the 1NT opening already described your hand, you have no reason to bid again. You pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣Q. Partner puts down the dummy, and you have to find the safest way to take ten tricks and make the contract.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AT62<br>♥ KQJ4<br>♦ 543<br>♣ 63</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J93<br>♥ AT975<br>♦ AKJ<br>♣ K9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As declarer, you start your plan by counting the potential losers. There are no heart losers. The suit is solid. There are two potential spade losers. You are missing both the ♠K and ♠Q. There is one potential diamond loser since the opponents hold the ♦Q. You start with two potential club losers. West has led a club, however, so you are guaranteed a trick with the ♣K. That leaves you with four losers: two spades, a diamond, and a club. You need to eliminate one loser.

In spades, you could plan to take repeated finesses. You could lead the ♠J. If West plays low, you can play low from dummy. If this loses to the ♠K or ♠Q, on regaining the lead, you take a second finesse. Playing this way, you will lose only one spade trick if West holds the ♠K,or the ♠Q,or both the ♠K and ♠Q. Relying on one of two finesses is about a 75% chance. The only thing that would be better is if you can get East to lead a spade. Then you are guaranteed to lose only one spade trick.

In diamonds, you also have the chance of avoiding a loser with the help of a finesse. Any time East holds the ♦Q, you won't lose a diamond trick. There is also the possibility of establishing an extra spade winner in dummy on which to discard the ♦J.

Combining the chances in spades and diamonds gives you a nearly 90% chance of making the contract. Will that be good enough on this deal?

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣Q, and East wins the first trick with the ♣A. Your ♣K is now promoted to a winner. East shifts to the ♦10 and you have your first decision. Should you try the diamond finesse right now?

There's no hurry to try the finesse. East might be leading a singleton diamond and, if you lose a finesse to the ♦Q, East might get to ruff a diamond. So let's assume you win the ♦K.

West plays the ♦8, which looks like an encouraging attitude signal. There's no need to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. You play a heart to dummy and both defenders follow suit. You come back to your hand with a heart, and both defenders follow suit again. That takes care of the outstanding trumps. You are now at the critical point in the play. What are you doing next?

Since the repeated finesse in spades has a 75% chance of success, it might seem you should start there. If it works, you might even be able to discard your diamond loser and not need to try the finesse in that suit. So let's see what will happen if you try a spade finesse at this point.

Suppose you lead the ♠J, tempting West to cover with an honor. Then you will be able to win the ♠A, drive out the remaining spade honor, and finish with an overtrick by discarding your diamond on dummy's extra spade winner.

West plays low, however. You play low from dummy, and East wins with the ♠Q. Your first finesse has lost.

East leads another diamond. You might as well try the diamond finesse. If that works, you will make the contract. When you try the ♦J, however, West wins the ♦Q. Your second finesse has lost.

West leads another diamond and you win the ♦A. Time for the second spade finesse. You lead the ♠9 and, when West follows with another low spade, you play low from dummy. Sadly, this loses to East's ♠K. That's the third finesse you have lost.

You have the rest of the tricks, but 4♥ is down one. That's pretty unlucky, with three out of three finesses losing. That happens less than 15% of the time. With three cards badly placed, could you have done any better?

Let's go back and take another look.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣Q, and East wins the first trick with the ♣A. East returns a diamond, and you win with the ♦K. You play a heart to dummy, drawing a round of trumps. You play a heart back to your hand and both defenders follow again, so all their trumps are gone. You are now at the critical point in the play. As you have seen, even if the odds are pretty good, taking three finesses on this deal doesn't work. Is there something you can do if all the missing cards lie unfavorably?

Yes. You have a 100% play at this point!

Let's see how the play should go.

You can start by taking your club winner. That removes all the clubs from your combined hands. The opponents won't be able to lead a club if they gain the lead without giving you a ruff and a sluff, allowing you to ruff in one hand and sluff - discard - a loser from the other hand.

Next, you give up the diamond finesse and simply take your other high diamond. No ♦Q appears. Now what?

You lead the ♦J, giving up a diamond trick to the defenders!

This puts the opponents on lead and, at the same time, eliminates the remaining diamonds in your combined hands. The opponents won't be able to lead a diamond without giving you a ruff and a sluff.

As it turns out, West wins the ♦Q. That's okay, a diamond finesse would have lost anyway. This is now the position with West on lead. If West leads a club or a diamond, you will be able to ruff in dummy and discard one of the spade losers from your hand. So West has little choice but to lead a spade. West leads the ♠4. What are you playing from dummy?

You play low from dummy, taking a spade finesse as you did earlier. This finesse loses to East's ♠Q, as before.

Look at the difference now, however. East is on lead and can't lead a diamond or a club without allowing you to discard your remaining spade loser and ruff in dummy. East's only hope is to lead another spade. East returns the ♠K, hoping West holds the ♠J. However, you win the ♠A. Unfortunately for the defenders, you have the ♠J. You have the rest of the tricks, making the 4♥ contract. You lost only a club, a diamond, and **one** spade trick, despite the unlucky lie of the spade suit.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AT62<br>♥ KQJ4<br>♦ 543<br>♣ 63</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 874<br>♥ 82<br>♦ Q872<br>♣ QJT4</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KQ5<br>♥ 63<br>♦ T96<br>♣ A8752</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J93<br>♥ AT975<br>♦ AKJ<br>♣ K9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Evenly divided suits between the combined hands are usually a detriment as you can't develop an extra winner in the suit on which to discard a loser in another suit. But they do have some usefulness. They can be used to strip an evenly divided suit - clubs on this deal.  You can then use the other evenly divided suit - diamonds on this deal - as the exit to put the defenders on lead and force them to lead a suit which you would much prefer is led by their side - spades on this deal.

The technique used on this deal is the end play. You eliminate the defenders' options in other suits and then put them on lead to lead the suit you want... or give you a ruff and a sluff, allowing you to eliminate a loser that way.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/08/08)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/05)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/08)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/09)

### By Date

Use the links below.