---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-18'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/08/18'

next:
  text: '2024-08-20'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/08/20'
---

# 2024-08-19

In this column, is there any danger to avoid?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT7<br>♥ AJ985<br>♦ KJ2<br>♣ 75</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East and West are vulnerable and your side is not. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♦. East passes. You must select a response.

With 13 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit, there should be enough combined strength for at least game when partner has enough to open the bidding at the one level. The priority, however, is to first determine Where the partnership belongs. You start by responding at the one level in the five-card major suit.

West passes. North raises to 2♥, and East passes. You have an opportunity to make a second call.

Partner's raise shows at least three-card support for hearts and a minimum-strength opening bid of about 12-16 points. You've now found an eight-card or longer major-suit fit. With the answers to both How High and Where, you can take the partnership to game in 4♥.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠3. Dummy comes down with only three-card heart support but 13 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton spade.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J5<br>♥ KT6<br>♦ AQT73<br>♣ K84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AT7<br>♥ AJ985<br>♦ KJ2<br>♣ 75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In 4♥, you can afford to lose only three tricks. In a suit contract, begin by counting the potential losers.

There is a potential heart loser since the opponents hold the ♥Q. There are two potential spade losers remaining after the A is gone. There are no diamond losers since you hold all the top honors in the suit between the combined hands. There are two potential club losers since the opponents have all the high clubs other than the ♣K. That's a total of five potential losers and you can afford only three. Two losers will need to be eliminated to make the contract.

You might avoid the heart loser with the help of a finesse. You have a two-way finesse for the missing ♦Q. If it is with West, you can trap it with dummy's heart holding. If it is with East, you can trap it with your heart holding.

Since West has led a spade, you are guaranteed two spade tricks no matter what East plays to the first trick. Alternatively, you could ruff the third round of spades in dummy or you could discard at least one spade on dummy's extra diamond winners.

A club loser could be avoided with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♣A. That's only a 50% chance. A better plan is to discard one or both club losers on dummy's extra diamond winners.

So you appear to have good chances to make the contract. Could anything go wrong?

Let's see what might happen.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠3. A low spade is played from dummy and East plays the ♠Q. You can win this trick with the ♠A, guaranteeing a second spade winner with dummy's remaining ♠J and your ♠10.

Suppose you decide to finesse against East for the missing ♥Q. You play a low heart to dummy's ♥K. Both defenders follow with low hearts. You continue with the ♥10. Unfortunately, East shows out. You have guessed wrong and you will have to lose a trick to West's ♥Q. Oh well. You still have good chances.

West takes a trick with the ♠K. That establishes your ♠10 as a winner. West switches to a low club. You try the ♣K from dummy, but East wins the ♣A. So much for that 50% finesse. East returns a club and West wins. That's the fourth trick for the defense. West leads another club, but you can ruff to win this trick.

You can draw both of West's remaining trumps. You have the rest of the tricks with your good diamonds, but the contract is down one.

Unfortunately, you lost a heart trick and two club tricks to go with the spade loser. It was unlucky East held the ♣A and West led a club before you had an opportunity to discard the club losers. Should you have played differently?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠3. A low spade is played from dummy and East plays the ♠Q.

Before automatically winning this trick, you need to consider any possible danger from the opponents. Even if you lose a spade trick and a heart trick, the contract will be in no danger if you can discard the club losers on dummy's extra diamond winners. That should be possible after you have drawn the defenders trumps. The only danger is if West gains the lead and can lead a club to trap dummy's ♣K when East holds the ♣A. How can you prevent West from gaining the lead?

The first step is to let East win the ♠Q!

If East subsequently wins a trick with the ♥Q, that will prevent East from putting West on lead when West holds the ♠K. There's no danger in letting East win this trick. You will later be able to eliminate the remaining spade loser by ruffing it in dummy or discarding it on one of dummy's diamonds if necessary.

East returns a spade, and you win the ♠A. You don't want to let West gain the lead and play a club. 

You now want to draw trumps. You don't mind losing a trick to the ♥Q if it is with East. East is the safe opponent who can't lead a club without giving you a trick with dummy's ♣K. You just don't want to lose a heart trick to West. You could start by playing the ♥A in case East started with a singleton ♥Q. However, you then won't be able to prevent West from getting a trick with the ♥Q if West started with four hearts. Instead, you can start with the' ♥J - or the ♥9 or ♥8 - planning to take a first round finesse against West. When West follows with a low heart, you play a low heart from dummy. You wouldn't mind if this lost to the ♥Q since East can't do you any harm if East wins.

However, the finesse wins as East follows with a low heart. You continue with a low heart and finesse dummy's ♥10 when West follows with another low heart. East shows out on this trick, discarding a high club. It's a good thing you took a first-round finesse since West started with four hearts, including the ♥Q. Dummy's ♥K draws a third round of hearts from West. You can cross to your hand with the ♦K. You can now draw West's last trump, the ♥Q, with your ♥A. You've managed to draw the defenders' trumps without losing a trick to West, the dangerous opponent. With trumps drawn, you can now safely take the rest of the diamond winners. On dummy's last two diamonds, you discard both low clubs.

You still have a trump winner. You have to lose the last spade trick to the defenders, but you have made the contract. You lost two spade tricks, but that was all.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J5<br>♥ KT6<br>♦ AQT73<br>♣ K84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K863<br>♥ Q742<br>♦ 85<br>♣ QT3</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q942<br>♥ 3<br>♦ 964<br>♣ AJ962</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AT7<br>♥ AJ985<br>♦ KJ2<br>♣ 75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The key to this contract is to recognize West is the dangerous opponent and East is the safe opponent. Provided you never lose a trick to West, the contract will be safe, even if you lose a heart trick and one or tWo spade tricks. You just don't want to lose a trick to West and give West an opportunity to lead a club. Therefore, you do everything you can to keep the safe opponent on lead and avoid losing a trick to the dangerous opponent.

This starts by letting East win the first spade trick. Now, if you were to lose a trick to the ♥Q, East would not be able to get to West's hand to lead a club.

You then play the hearts so that, if a trick is lost, it will be to East, not West. By taking a first-round heart finesse, you guard against West having started with four hearts, including the ♥Q. You don't mind losing a trick to the singleton ♥Q in East's hand. You just don't want to lose a trick to West.

Holding up the spade winner and taking the heart finesse into the East hand are avoidance plays. You do everything you can to avoid letting West gain the lead, and that ensures the contract. You are actually rewarded with an overtrick when West turns out to hold the ♥Q.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/08/19)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/16)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/08)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/22)

### By Date

Use the links below.