---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-22'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/08/22'

next:
  text: '2024-08-24'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/08/24'
---

# 2024-08-23

On this deal, is there possible danger you need to watch out for?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ86<br>♥ T<br>♦ KJ2<br>♣ K853</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South with neither side vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make in first chair.

You have 14 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. With an unbalanced hand, you start with the five-card suit.

West passes, and your partner, North, makes a limit raise of 3♠. East passes, and you have to decide what call to make after this start.

Partner's jump raise is invitational, showing about 10-12 points and four-card spade support. With 15 points, you have enough extra to accept partner's invitation but no interest in going any higher than game. You continue to 4♠.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦4, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT53<br>♥ A97<br>♦ T93<br>♣ A94</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ86<br>♥ T<br>♦ KJ2<br>♣ K853</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has four-card support for spades and 11 high-card points. A sound limit raise. It's up to you to make ten tricks and you start by considering the potential losers. How many do you have?

There are no spade losers. The trump suit is solid. There are no heart losers. Dummy's ♥A will take care of the singleton heart in your hand. There will be two potential club losers left in your hand after the ♣A and ♣K are gone. There are two potential diamond losers since you are missing the ♦A and ♦Q. That's a total of four potential losers. You need to eliminate only one to make the contract.

You can't avoid one of the club losers. However, if the defenders' six clubs are divided 3-3, you can establish your fourth club as a winner through length by giving up a trick to the opponents. If the clubs don't divide 3-3, you can plan on ruffing the fourth club in dummy.

You have one sure diamond loser, and it looks as though you are about to lose it right away since West has led the suit. You could possibly avoid a second loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♦Q. If the defenders' clubs are divided 3-3, there is also the possibility of discarding a diamond from dummy on your fourth club. Then you won't need the diamond finesse. So it appears you should have only one club loser and at most two diamond losers.

Are there any potential problems?

The only thing that can go wrong is if the defenders can ruff one of your winners before you are able to draw trumps. Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦4. You play low from dummy, and East wins the first trick with the ♦A. East leads back the ♦7. You are at the critical point in the play. What should you play to this trick?

Since the only danger is that the defenders may ruff one of your winners, it may seem safest to win this trick with the ♦K and draw the defenders' trumps as quickly as possible. You don't want to lose a second diamond trick to West and have East ruff the third round. So let's see what will happen if you play the ♦K at trick two.

You play the ♦K, but it is West who ruffs this trick. West started with a singleton diamond. West leads a club, and you win the ♣K.

You draw a round of trumps and both defenders follow suit. There's still one trump outstanding. You play a second round of trumps, drawing the last trump. With two remaining losers, the only hope is that you can get one of the defenders to help out by giving you a ruff and a sluff. To do that, you need to eliminate the hearts in your combined hands. You take a trick with dummy's ♥A. You ruff one of dummy's hearts. You cross back to dummy with the A. Both defenders follow with low clubs. You cross back to dummy with the ♣A. Both defenders follow with low clubs. You ruff dummy's last heart. You now have to decide on the best way to put a defender on lead.

Since you know East holds the ♦Q, one possibility is to lead a club. If the clubs divide 3-3 and West has to win the trick, West will have nothing to lead except hearts. That will allow you to ruff in dummy and discard the diamond loser. Alternatively, you can put East on lead with the ♦Q and hope East has no clubs left to lead. East will then have to lead a heart or a diamond, and that will allow. you to ruff in your hand and discard the club loser from dummy.

Leading a diamond requires only one good thing - that the clubs are divided 4-2 and East has no clubs left to lead. Leading a club requires two good things to happen - that the clubs are divided 3-3 and West has to win the club trick. So let's assume you lead a diamond, putting East on lead with the ♦Q.

Unfortunately, East still has the ♦Q and takes the fourth trick for the defense. It wouldn't have done any good to exit with a club. East would have won and taken the diamond winner.

4♠ is down one. You lost three diamonds and a club.

So once West was able to ruff the ♦K at trick two, there was nothing you could do. You had to choose to take the diamond finesse. But what if East started with a doubleton diamond and West won the ♦Q and gave East a diamond ruff? How could you know what to do?

Let's go back to the first trick.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♦4, and East wins the first trick with the ♦A. Are there any clues available at this point as to how the defenders' diamonds are divided?

Yes! East must hold three or more diamonds!

Assuming the defenders are playing fourth best leads, if West's ♦4 is from length, West must have started with either three or four diamonds The ♦3 is in dummy and the ♦2 is in your hand. Unless West has led a singleton diamond, West has presumably led low from a four-card suit or, perhaps, a three-card suit. How does this information help you when East returns the ♦7 at trick two?

It must be safe to take the diamond finesse!

If West does win the ♦Q, West won't be able to give East a ruff since East started with at least three diamonds.

On the actual deal, West started with a singleton diamond and ruffs this trick. That's too bad, but you are still okay. West leads a club, and you win the ♣K. If East had ruffed this trick, you truly would have been unlucky!

You can now start drawing trumps. Both defenders follow to the first round. You draw the last trump. No more ruffs for the defenders. You can safely take your other club winner.

You give up the club trick you have to lose. That's all, however. You have the rest of the tricks. You lost only one diamond, one club, and a diamond ruff.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT53<br>♥ A97<br>♦ T93<br>♣ A94</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 972<br>♥ KJ8543<br>♦ 4<br>♣ T76</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 4<br>♥ Q62<br>♦ AQ8765<br>♣ QJ2</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ86<br>♥ T<br>♦ KJ2<br>♣ K853</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

One of the dangers of playing in a trump contract is that the defenders may ruff one or more of the winners you are counting on. That's why you generally want to draw the defenders' trumps as quickly as possible unless there are other priorities that must be taken care of first.

When defenders are threatening a possible ruff, you need to play detective and try to determine which defender is dangerous and which is safe.

On this deal, West's opening lead of the ♦4 gives you the clue that East is the safe opponent and it is West who might be the dangerous opponent and be able to get a ruff.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/08/23)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/22)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/08)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/24)

### By Date

Use the links below.