---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-29'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/08/29'

next:
  text: '2024-08-31'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/08/31'
---

# 2024-08-30

On this deal, can you take all your winners without giving up the lead?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 84<br>♥ AK<br>♦ AKT975<br>♣ QJ8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. You have to decide what call to make with this hand in first position.

You have 17 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card diamond suit. Although the hand is semi-balanced, it is too strong to open 1NT and not strong enough to open 2NT - although some might consider this. So you start with the six-card minor suit.

West overcalls 2♣. Partner, North, makes a negative double, showing support for hearts and spades and enough strength to at least compete at the two level. East passes, and you have to decide what to do next.

You are too strong to rebid only 2♦, which would show a minimum opening bid. You are also too strong for a jump to 3♦, which would show only a medium-strength opening bid of about 17-18 points. Since the hand is semi-balanced and you do have a club stopper and a potential source of tricks, it looks reasonable to go for 3NT. Let's try that.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣7, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQT95<br>♥ QT64<br>♦ J4<br>♣ T4</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 84<br>♥ AK<br>♦ AKT975<br>♣ QJ8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 8 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. With support for both major suits, that's a sound hand for a negative double.

Despite holding a fair number of high cards in the combined hands, you have some work to do. The first step is to count the number of winners there are in the combined hands. How many sure tricks do you have?

You don't start with any sure spade winners since the opponents hold the ♠A. There appear to be three sure heart tricks, the ♥A, ♥K, and ♥Q. You don't start with any sure club tricks. However, West has led the suit, so it appears you will get one club winner. There are two sure diamond tricks, the ♦A and ♦K. So you seem to have six sure tricks: three hearts, a club, and two diamonds. You need to find three more.

You can promote a spade winner by driving out the ♠A. You can potentially get more than one extra trick by leading toward dummy's spades. If West holds the ♠A, you can get tricks with both the ♠K and ♠Q with the help of a repeated finesse. You might even consider finessing dummy's ♠9 or ♠10, which could result in four spade tricks if West holds the ♠J.

You might get a fourth heart trick from dummy's ♥10 if the ♥J falls in the first three rounds of the suit.

You aren't getting more than one trick from the club suit.

In diamonds, however, you can get four extra tricks with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♦Q. Taking the finesse is better odds than playing the ♦A-K, following the guideline of eight ever, nine never. Even if the finesse loses, you will establish three extra diamond winners.

So you seem to have lots of ways to get the extra tricks you need. Are there any problems?

Yes.

Most importantly, West has led a club and West bid clubs during the auction. Even though you will get one club trick, the opponents will have at least four club tricks to take if they gain the lead.

You can't afford to give up the lead!

In addition, you are short of immediate entries to dummy. You can't even reach the third heart winner in dummy - let alone the fourth if the ♥J were to fall. Even if you could establish dummy's spade suit, you couldn't reach it. You may not even have an entry to try the diamond finesse. So getting extra tricks from spades and hearts isn't going to work. The defenders will take their club winners as soon as you give up the lead.

It looks as though your only hope lies in the diamond suit. If you can't get to dummy to take the diamond finesse, you will have to play the ♦A-K and hope the defenders' ♦Q will fall singleton or doubleton. That's against the odds, but it is your only option if you can't get to dummy to try the diamond finesse.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣7. You are immediately at a critical point in the play. What are you playing from dummy?

The standard guideline is second hand low. If East produces the ♣A or ♣K and leads back another club, you still have a club stopper. So let's see what will happen when you play a low club from dummy at trick one.

Suppose you play dummy's ♣4. East plays the ♣6 and you win with the ♣8. What now?

You've won the first trick but can't afford to give up the lead. Since the ♣A-K are still outstanding, the opponents will have enough established club winners to defeat the contract right away. So it looks as though you have to rely on the diamond suit to give you the tricks you need.

Let's assume you start with the ♦A. Both defenders follow suit, but no ♦Q appears. When you continue with the◆K, East shows out and discards a spade. That's not good. East has started with four diamonds including the ♦Q.

Here are the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQT95<br>♥ QT64<br>♦ <br>♣ T</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A7<br>♥ 985<br>♦ <br>♣ AK953</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J32<br>♥ J732<br>♦ Q8<br>♣ 2</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 84<br>♥ AK<br>♦ T975<br>♣ QJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If you play another diamond, East will win and return a club. West can then take five club winners plus the ♠A.

In fact, with West holding the ♠A, there's nothing you can do at this point. Even if you were to lead a low spade toward dummy's ♠K or ♠Q, West would most certainly rise with the ♠A and take the established club winners. 3NT will be down three.

Could you have done better?

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♣7. Before automatically playing a low club from dummy at trick one, you need to consider how you can get all the tricks you need from the diamond suit. Can you get the tricks you need if you can't take the diamond finesse?

Possibly. If the ♦Q falls singleton or doubleton when you play the ♦A-K, you will have six diamond tricks. Together with two hearts and a club, that would be nine tricks. The odds are not good, however. Is there a potential entry to dummy so you can try the diamond finesse?

Yes. The ♣10!

That could be an entry if West holds both the ♣A and ♣K. Is that possible?

Definitely!

First, West bid the suit during the auction and could easily have led a low club away from the ♣A-K against a notrump contract. In fact, you can tell that West holds both the ♣A and ♣K. How?

West has led the ♣7. Assuming it's fourth best, you can apply the Rule of Eleven. Subtracting 7 from 11 leaves 4 cards higher than the 7 in the other three hands. And you can see all four of them - the ♣Q, ♣J, ♣10, and ♣8!

How can you put all this information to work?

Let's see.

At trick one, you play dummy's ♣10!

Your detective work has told you that this is your one and only chance to get to dummy without giving up the lead.

As you expected, East doesn't have a higher club. Dummy's ♣10 wins the trick as East plays the ♣6 and you play the ♣8. What do you do next?

You've reached dummy and this is now the only chance to try the diamond finesse. You have another key decision. Which diamond should you lead from dummy?

The ♦J.

You have the ♦10 and ♦9, so you can afford to have the ♦J covered by the ♦Q. Playing the ♦J will allow you to remain in dummy and repeat the finesse if it works.

East plays the ♦2 and you play the ♦5. The moment of truth has arrived. If West has the ♦Q, you are going to lose a lot of tricks! West follows with a low diamond. Success! The finesse has worked.

The rest is going to be easy. You lead dummy's remaining diamond and repeat the finesse when East follows with another low diamond. West shows out on this trick. It's a good thing you started with dummy's ♦J. East started with four diamonds. You can now take the ♦A-K. East's ♦Q falls on the fourth round of diamonds.

You can take your two remaining diamond winners and the ♥A-K, giving up the rest of the tricks to the opponents. You've made the 3NT contract with one club, two hearts, and **six** diamond tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQT95<br>♥ QT64<br>♦ J4<br>♣ T4</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A76<br>♥ 985<br>♦ 6<br>♣ AK9753</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J32<br>♥ J732<br>♦ Q832<br>♣ 62</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 84<br>♥ AK<br>♦ AKT975<br>♣ QJ8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This deal illustrates the importance of doing your detective work before playing to the first trick.

If you automatically play a low club from dummy at trick one, the contract can no longer be made. You need to decide how you are going to need the play to go and how you might get to dummy for that to succeed.

Taking a first-round diamond finesse takes a lot of courage. If it loses, you will go down three tricks, vulnerable. And it will be unfortunate if you lose to a singleton or doubleton ♦Q in West's hand since you could have made the contract if you didn't generate a dummy entry at trick one. Still, you went with the odds, which should pay off in the long run.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/08/30)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/26)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/08)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/31)

### By Date

Use the links below.