---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-02'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/02'

next:
  text: '2025-02-04'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/04'
---

# 2025-02-03

In today's column, have you reached a safe contract?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK<br>♥ KJ9653<br>♦ AKQJ<br>♣ J</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. North and South are vulnerable, and East and West are not. As dealer there is a chance to choose an opening call.

With 22 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit, this hand is too strong to open the bidding at the one level and risk being left to play there. You have almost enough for game in your own hand, with likely at least nine tricks. You can open with a strong artificial 2♣ bid.

West passes. North responds 2♦, an artificial waiting bid. East passes. It is time to select a rebid.

You can now describe the hand by bidding 2♥. This shows an unbalanced hand with a five-card or longer heart suit. It is forcing, so there is no need to jump.

West passes. North raises to 3♥ which shows three-card or longer heart support and some values. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

If partner has as little as an ace and the ♥Q, you can make a small slam. If partner has two aces, you may be able to make a grand slam. You could start investigating by making a control-showing bid of 3♠, but it is more straightforward to simply use the Blackwood convention to check for aces. Let's go with that.

West passes again. Partner replies 5♦ to the Blackwood inquiry, showing one ace in standard methods. East passes, and the auction is back to you once more.

You are missing one ace so there is no grand slam. Some partnerships may be able to check for the trump queen at this point, but if partner has something like ♥A-10-8-4, you won't need the ♥Q. Let's go with simply jumping to the small slam in hearts, 6♥.

Everyone passes. The auction has ended and you are now the declarer in 6♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>5♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>6♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠J.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 953<br>♥ Q84<br>♦ T62<br>♣ AQ75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AK<br>♥ KJ9653<br>♦ AKQJ<br>♣ J</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 8 high-card points, including an ace, the ♥Q, and three-card heart support.

Making 6♥ will require twelve tricks. In a suit contract, begin by counting potential losers. There are is a sure heart loser since you are missing the ♥A. Only in the unlikely case the missing hearts divide 4-0 will there be a second possible loser. There are no spade losers since you hold the ♠A and ♠K. There are no diamond losers since you hold all the top honors in the suit. There are no club losers since dummy's ♣A will take care of the singleton club in your hand. That's only one loser, so the contract seems secure.

In Considering the Order, the only danger appears to be the possibility a defender may ruff one of your winners. So your plan will be to draw the defenders' trumps as quickly as possible.

Is there anything else to consider?

Let's see how the play might go on the actual deal.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠J. A low spade is played from dummy, East follows with a low spade, and you can win the first trick.

The priority is to draw the defenders' trumps, so you need to start by driving out the ♥A. Suppose you start by leading a low heart to dummy's ♥Q. West follows with a low heart and the ♥Q wins, but there is bad news. East shows out, discarding a club. Much against the odds, the defenders' hearts have divided 4-0, with West having started with all four hearts. West still holds the ♥A-10-7 and you are destined to lose two heart tricks no matter what you do.

Let's look at the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 95<br>♥ 84<br>♦ T62<br>♣ AQ75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T87<br>♥ AT7<br>♦ 85<br>♣ 963</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q42<br>♥ <br>♦ 9743<br>♣ KT42</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A<br>♥ KJ965<br>♦ AKQJ<br>♣ J</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The small slam contract is down one, losing two heart tricks.

Could you have known about the bad break?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠J. A low spade is played from dummy, East follows with a low spade, and you win the first trick.

The priority is to draw the defenders' trumps since the main danger is a defender might ruff one of declarer's winners. However, that isn't the only danger. There is the possibility - unlikely though it is - the missing trumps are divided 4-0. Is there anything declarer can do about that?

Yes!

Start with a high heart from declarer's hand.

That will reveal if either defender holds all four of the missing hearts and declarer will still be in a position to do something about that.

When the ♥J is led, West follows with a low heart and East shows out, discarding a club. The defenders' hearts have indeed divided 4-0 and declarer now knows West started with all four. You can now lead a low heart toward dummy and, when West follows with a low heart, finesse dummy's ♥8, trapping West's ♥10. East discards another club. Dummy's ♥Q can be used to drive out West's ♥A as East discards a diamond.

West leads another spade and you win. West's remaining heart, the ♥10, can be drawn with declarer's ♥K. That removes any danger from the defenders' trumps.

You have the rest of the tricks with nothing left but winners. You lost one heart trick, but that's all.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 953<br>♥ Q84<br>♦ T62<br>♣ AQ75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ JT87<br>♥ AT72<br>♦ 85<br>♣ 963</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q642<br>♥ <br>♦ 9743<br>♣ KT842</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AK<br>♥ KJ9653<br>♦ AKQJ<br>♣ J</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The slam looks very secure when dummy comes down as the only loser appears to be the ♥A. The main danger is the defenders may ruff one of declarer's winners before all the trumps are drawn. So declarer's priority is to draw trumps as quickly as possible.

Whenever things look fairly straightforward, however, declarer needs to focus on what might go wrong.

On this deal, there is the possibility the defenders' four trumps are divided 4-0, so declarer needs to consider if anything can be done when that's the case. With this combined heart holding, declarer has a 100% safety play to guard against either defender holding all four hearts. Declarer starts the hearts by leading a high heart from declarer's hand. If both defenders follow to the first round of hearts, there's no problem drawing the remaining trumps. If West started with all four hearts, as on the actual deal, declarer can now trap the ♥10 with the help of a finesse. Similarly, if West had shown out on the first round of hearts, declarer could then trap the ♥10 in East's hand.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/03)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/01)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/03#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.