---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-03'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/03'

next: false
---

# 2025-02-04

In today's deal, what critical information do you have about declarer's hand?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A43<br>♥ JT84<br>♦ 74<br>♣ QT87</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South with neither side vulnerable. East is the dealer and opens 2NT, showing about 20-21 points and a balanced hand. You have your first opportunity to make a call.

With only 7 high-card points and a balanced hand, you are far too weak to come in over such a strong opening.

West responds 3♥. That's announced as a Jacoby transfer bid, showing five or more spades. Your partner, North, passes, and opener duly bids 3♠. The auction is back to you.

You still have nothing to say except pass.

West now bids 3NT, showing exactly a five-card spade suit and offering opener a choice of game contracts. Partner and East both pass. Opener has chosen to play in 3NT rather than 4♠. You have one last call.

Naturally, you pass, and the auction ends.

3NT is now the contract and you must choose an opening lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

You immediately have your first decision. What should you lead?

The general guideline for leading against a notrump contract is to lead fourth highest from your longest and strongest suit. Here, you have four cards in both hearts and clubs. Since the clubs are slightly stronger, that seems like a reasonable choice. Partner had an opportunity to make a lead-directing double of West's artificial 3♥ bid with a strong holding in hearts and did not.

## Possible Defense

Suppose you lead the ♣7, and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQJT6<br>♥ 73<br>♦ 832<br>♣ 962</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A43<br>♥ JT84<br>♦ 74<br>♣ QT87</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Dummy has 6 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. Facing a 20-21 point hand, West certainly has enough to take the partnership to game.

A low club is played from dummy, partner plays the ♣K, which wins the trick as declarer plays a low club. That looks like a good start. Partner returns the ♣J. Declarer follows with another low club. You have another decision. What are you playing to this trick?

Holding the ♣8 and with the ♣9 in dummy which will fall on the third round of the suit, you can afford to overtake partner's ♣J. That will let you continue clubs and establish another winner even if partner started with only a doubleton club. You win the second trick. You can now lead the ♣10, squashing dummy's ♣9 and promoting the ♣8 into a winner after declarer wins the ♣A. It turns out partner did have a third club to lead if you hadn't overtaken the but it was best to make sure you could establish a third club trick for the defense while still holding the ♠A as an entry.

Next, declarer leads the ♠5 toward dummy. You have another critical decision to make. What should you play to this trick?

You might be tempted to win the immediately and take your established club winner. That will give the defense four tricks. So let's see what will happen if you do win the ♠A.

Suppose you play the ♠A. That's the third trick for your side. You take the promoted club winner as partner discards a low spade, and dummy and declarer discard low hearts. Your side now has four tricks. Can you find an extra winner in partner's hand?

Here are the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 9<br>♥ 962<br>♦ Q965<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQJT<br>♥ 7<br>♦ 832<br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 8<br>♥ AKQ<br>♦ AKJT<br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 43<br>♥ JT84<br>♦ 74<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Unfortunately, declarer can claim the rest of the tricks with the ♦A-K,♥A-K-Q, and dummy's established spade winners. Your side took four tricks, but declarer has nine tricks, making 3NT.

Let's go back to see what you might have done on defense.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♣7, and partner wins the first trick with the ♣K. Partner returns the ♣J. When declarer follows with a low club, you correctly overtake it with the ♣Q. You can now continue to establish club winners even if partner had started with only a doubleton ♣K-J. You continue with the ♣10. Partner follows suit. Declarer wins this trick with the ♣A, promoting your ♣8 to a winner. Next, declarer leads the ♠5 toward dummy. Should you win your ♠A?

No!

If you win the ♠A, you could take the ♣8 and give the defense four tricks. However, it will also allow declarer to get four tricks from dummy's spades. Declarer has shown a balanced hand and, presumably, has two or more spades. Unless partner has the ♥A or ♦A, you will then be unlikely to defeat the contract. So it must be best to hold up winning the ♠A, hoping to run declarer out of spades so that declarer can't get four spade tricks.

You play a low spade and declarer wins the trick with dummy's ♠10 as partner follows with the ♠2. Declarer now leads a low diamond from dummy. Partner follows with a low diamond, and declarer plays the ♦J, winning the trick. You have another decision to make. Which of your diamonds are you playing to this trick?

Since you cant win the trick, partner is unlikely to assume the card you play is an attitude signal. A more useful piece of information to send to partner is a count signal, telling partner how many diamonds you hold. This might help partner decide what to hold on to later in the play if partner has to make a discard. To show an even number of diamonds, you can play the ♦7, starting a high-low count signal. Hopefully, partner will be able to figure out whether you have two diamonds or four diamonds.

Declarer now leads another low spade toward dummy. You are faced with another decision. Should you win this trick or hold up a second time?

The objective in holding up is to run declarer out of spades so that declarer won't have a spade left as a link card to dummy's established winners. If declarer started with four spades, there is nothing you can do. If declarer started with three spades, you need to hold up winning the a second time. If declarer started with only two spades, you can afford to win this trick. Do you know how many spades declarer started with?

Yes! There are two clues. First, East elected to play in 3NT rather than 4♠. With three or four spades, East would usually choose to play in 4♠, knowing the partnership has an eight-card fit. More importantly, partner played the ♠2 to the first spade trick. Just as you felt the most useful information to give partner in the diamond suit was a count signal, partner should send you a count signal when declarer leads spades, especially when there is no outside entry to dummy's spades. Partner, hoping you hold the wants to help you decide how long to hold up. So partner's play of the ♠2 on the first round of spades should be the start of a low-high count signal, showing an odd number of spades. Here, partner presumably started with three spades. All indications are that declarer started with only two spades and this is declarer's last spade.

So you should win this trick with the ♠A!

What now?

Having isolated dummy's spade winners you can now take your established club winner. Everyone discards a low heart on this trick. You have yet another decision. What are you leading to the next trick?

Partner's discard of a low heart is a discouraging attitude signal in hearts, warning you that partner likely doesn't hold a high honor. Declarer presumably has the ♥A-K-Q. Since there are no clubs left and you don't want to lead a spade, what are you going to do with this information?

Lead a heart!

Even if declarer holds the ♥A-K-Q, you can safely lead the ♥J without giving declarer any help. Declarer is entitled to the heart winners anyway. If you lead a diamond, you may be helping declarer establish tricks in that suit.

Partner follows with another low heart, and declarer wins the ♥Q. Declarer takes a trick with the ♥K. Declarer takes another trick with the ♥A. As you thought, declarer had the top three hearts. Declarer takes a trick with the ♦K. Declarer takes another trick with the ♦A. That's declarer's eighth trick.

However, declarer is left with the ♦10 and partner wins the last trick with the ♦Q. That's the fifth trick for the defense, and the 3NT contract is down one. Your side got three club tricks, a spade trick and a diamond trick.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 972<br>♥ 962<br>♦ Q965<br>♣ KJ4</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQJT6<br>♥ 73<br>♦ 832<br>♣ 962</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 85<br>♥ AKQ5<br>♦ AKJT<br>♣ A53</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A43<br>♥ JT84<br>♦ 74<br>♣ QT87</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The opponents might have played in 4♠ rather than 3NT. That would have made with an overtrick. In notrump, dummy's spades provided only one trick. In a spade contract, they would have provided four tricks. Perhaps West should have insisted on playing in spades, even on a 5-2 fit. Once the opponents reach 3NT, however, the defenders have a chance to defeat the contract with careful play.

As South, you have a lot of decisions to make if the contract is to be defeated. Some of them are critical; some are not. It's not always easy to tell which ones will be most important.

You first had to choose an opening lead. Leading a club gave your side the best chance to establish winners since your club suit is stronger than the heart suit. Next, you had to decide whether or not to overtake partner's ♣J. Since partner held a third club, it didn't matter on this deal.

You then had to decide whether to hold up on the first round of spades and whether to hold up on the second round of spades. That was critical. If you didn't hold up the first time, declarer would get four spade tricks and make the contract. If you did hold up a second time, declarer would get two spade tricks and make the contract. You had to hold up exactly once.

You had to decide which diamond to play on the first round of the suit. Giving partner a count signal didn't actually matter on this deal. Partner had an easy time holding on to all four diamonds. On a different layout, however, it might have been critical for partner to know how many diamonds you held.

After winning the ♠A and taking your last club winner, you had to decide whether to lead a heart or a diamond. It was critical to lead a heart rather than a diamond. If you led a diamond, declarer would finish with four diamond tricks to go with three hearts, a club, and a spade, making 3NT.

What do you have to help make all these decisions?

Sometimes it is guidelines such as leading fourth best from your longest and strongest suit. Sometimes it is with the help of partner's signals. Partner's count signal in spades told you how long to hold up. Sometimes it is logic. The decision to lead a heart rather than a diamond near the end of the play.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/04)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/30)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/04#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.