---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-05'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/05'

next: false
---

# 2025-02-06

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ9873<br>♥ AKJ5<br>♦ Q82<br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens 1♦. Partner, North, passes, and so does East. You have to choose a call in the balancing position.

You have 16 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit. An overcall can be made in the balancing position with less than in the direct position. That makes this hand too strong for a simple overcall of 1♠.

One possibility is to make a jump overcall of 2♠. In the balancing position, a jump overcall shows an intermediate hand, about 14-17 points and a six-card suit. You are slightly strong for that action, however, and you might miss a heart fit if partner has four or more hearts. The best action is to start with a takeout double, planning to bid spades to show a strong hand.

West passes, and partner makes a jump advance of 3♣. This shows an invitational hand of about 9-11 points since a 2♣ advance would show about 0-8 points. East passes, and you must decide what to do next.

You can now follow through with your plan to show the spade suit. Since partner has shown some values and you are showing a hand too strong to simply overcall 1♠, your 3♠ bid is forcing. There should be enough combined strength to play in game.

West passes, and partner raises to 4♠. East passes, and you have another chance to make a call.

You've described your hand and partner has chosen to go for game in spades. You have nothing more to say.

West also passes, ending the auction. You are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦A, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJT<br>♥ T42<br>♦ J53<br>♣ AQJ5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ9873<br>♥ AKJ5<br>♦ Q82<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In a suit contract, the first step is to consider the potential losers you have. There are no losers in the trump suit since you have all the top spades. There is one potential heart loser since you are missing the ♥Q. There are no club losers. In fact, you have an extra club winner in dummy on which you could discard a loser in another suit. You have three potential diamond losers since you are missing the ♦A, ♦K, and ♦10. That's a total of four potential losers, a heart and three diamonds. You can afford only three losers.

In diamonds, West has led the ♦A. That will allow you to promote a diamond winner with your remaining ♦Q and ♦J. You might also be able to discard a diamond on dummy's extra club winner. Since West has bid diamonds, however, there is the possibility that East may be able to ruff a diamond if East started with two or fewer diamonds, and you'll be back to three losers.

In hearts, you can discard your fourth heart on dummy's ♣A or perhaps ruff it in dummy if the defenders' hearts aren't divided 3-3. However, that still leaves you with a potential loser. You could plan to try the heart finesse, hoping East holds the ♥Q. That's usually a 50% chance. Is that the case on this deal?

No!

You have 28 high-card points between the combined hands, leaving only 12 for the opponents. West opened the bidding. Unless West holds a very distributional hand, West presumably holds all the defenders' high cards, including the ♥Q.

Do you have any alternative to taking the heart finesse?

Yes!

Since you "know" West holds the ♥Q, you don't have to take a finesse you know will lose. Instead, you can play the ♥A and ♥K, hoping West started with a singleton or doubleton ♥Q.

Another possibility is to try to develop a second club winner in dummy on which to discard the ♥J. Usually, you would try leading the ♣Q from dummy, hoping East holds the ♣K. You take a ruffing finesse. If East plays the ♣L, you ruff and dummy's ♣J becomes a winner. If East doesn't play the ♣K, you simply discard your heart loser. But will that work on this deal?

No. You have already determined that West holds all the missing high cards. So it appears your only hope is that West's ♥Q will fall singleton or doubleton.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦A. You play low from dummy, and East plays the ♦9, which looks to be an encouraging attitude signal. You follow with a low diamond. West continues with the ♦K, winning the second trick. The good news is your ♦Q is now a winner. The bad news is it's unlikely to last very long since East played the ♦7, finishing an encouraging high-low signal. West continues with a third diamond and, as you feared, East ruffs with a low spade as you have to follow suit. The defense has the first three tricks. You can't afford to lose any more. East leads a low heart. You are at a critical point in the play. Should you try the finesse?

No. You've already determined that West almost certainly holds the ♥Q. You don't plan to take a "losing" finesse. Besides, you can always try the finesse later if you change your mind. You win the ♥K.

You might as well start drawing the defenders' trumps. Suppose you lead a low spade to dummy's ♠10, and both defenders follow suit. You draw the defenders' remaining trump with the ♠J. West follows suit while East discards a low club. It appears the contract now hinges on finding the ♥Q. You play a low heart, and East follows with a low heart. What now?

Again, it's almost a sure thing that West holds the ♥Q, so there's no point in trying a finesse. You rise with the ♥A. Unfortunately, West plays a low heart. The ♥Q is still outstanding.

There's not much you can do now. You can cross to dummy's ♠K. You can play the ♥A and discard a heart loser. Both defenders follow with low clubs.

Eventually, you still have a heart to lose. 4♠ is down one, losing two diamonds, a diamond ruff, and a heart.

You can't do anything about losing the first three tricks, but is there something else that offers a chance of getting rid of a heart loser?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

Since you know that West holds both the ♥Q and ♣K and finesses in either suit will not work, what can you do to eliminate a loser?

You could hope that West started with a singleton or doubleton ♥Q. By playing the ♥A and ♥K, your ♥J and ♥10 will then be promoted to winners. What else can you try?

You can hope that West started with at most three clubs, including the ♣K. Then you can ruff one or two of dummy's clubs and the ♣K will fall, making dummy's remaining club honor a winner.

So you have two possible chances in hearts and clubs. If possible, you want to combine your chances. Let's see how this might be done.

West has led the ♦A and continues with the ♦K, winning the first two tricks. At trick three, West leads a diamond for East to ruff. That's all the tricks you can afford to lose. East leads a low heart, and you correctly avoid the finesse and win with the ♥K.

You draw the defenders' trumps. Does it matter where you win the first trump?

Definitely. If you want to try to develop an extra club trick, you need entries to dummy, and those can only come from the spade suit. You play a low spade to dummy, and both defenders follow suit. There is only one trump outstanding. What do you do next?

You want to go to work on the club suit now that you are in dummy. You play the ♣A and discard your low heart. Both defenders follow with low clubs. You continue with a low club and ruff with a high spade. Both defenders again follow with clubs, but no ♣K has appeared. You cross back to dummy with another trump. Both defenders again follow suit. That takes care of all the defenders' trumps. What next?

You lead dummy's ♣Q, and East follows with a low club. What now?

If you thought East held the ♣K, you would discard your remaining heart loser. However, you've already determined that West must hold the ♣K. So you ruff this trick. Great news! West's ♣K falls on this trick. West started with only three clubs. Dummy's ♣J is now a winner. You get back to dummy with the last trump. You discard the ♥J on dummy's ♣J.

You have the last two tricks with your two aces. You've made the 4♠ contract, losing two diamond tricks and a diamond ruff, but no heart trick.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJT<br>♥ T42<br>♦ J53<br>♣ AQJ5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 52<br>♥ Q87<br>♦ AKT64<br>♣ KT9</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 76<br>♥ 963<br>♦ 97<br>♣ 876432</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ9873<br>♥ AKJ5<br>♦ Q82<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When the auction tells you that a particular defender must have a particular card, you should play that defender for the card, even if it means going against the odds. You should assume an opening bidder in first or second position has at least 12 high-card points unless the opener is known to have a distributional hand, in which case 10 or 11 high-card points is possible.

On this deal, you were fortunate that West held only three clubs so that the ♣K fell in three rounds of the suit.

What if the ♣K had not fallen?

Then you would play your remaining high heart, hoping West started with a doubleton ♥Q.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/06)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/03)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/06#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.