---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-06'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/06'

next:
  text: '2025-02-08'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/08'
---

# 2025-02-07

On this deal, can you reach partner's established winners?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A864<br>♥ KT5<br>♦ AJ5<br>♣ A95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Neither side is vulnerable. You are the dealer sitting South. You have to decide what call to make in first position.

You have 16 high-card points and a perfectly balanced hand. That's right in the middle of the 15-17 point range for a strong 1NT opening.

West passes, and partner, North, responds 2♦. That's a Jacoby transfer bid, showing at least a five-card heart suit and asking you to bid 2♥. Before you do that, however, East overcalls 3♣. What are you going to do after this development?

If East had passed, you would have complied with partner's request to bid 2♥. Once East overcalls, you are no longer under any obligation to bid. You might compete to 3♥ with four-card support, knowing the partnership has a nine-card fit, but there's no reason to bid with only three-card support. You've shown your strength, and it is now up to partner to bid again with a suitable hand.

West surprises you a little by bidding 3NT. Partner and East both pass, and the auction is back to you.

You have 16 high-card points and the opponents must have at most 24. You've already shown your strength with the 1 NT opening, so doubling the opponents for penalty would be up to partner. Since partner hasn't taken any action, it's time to pass.

Your pass ends the auction. Partner is now on lead against West's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>3♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♥7, and East puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QJT<br>♥ A4<br>♦ K7<br>♣ KQT842</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A864<br>♥ KT5<br>♦ AJ5<br>♣ A95</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays dummy's low heart. You are at the critical point in the defense. What are you playing to this trick?

The general guideline in this situation is third hand high, doing your best to win the trick for the partnership. Let's see what will happen if you follow that maxim on this deal.

Suppose you play the ♥K at trick one. That wins the first tick as declarer follows with the ♥2. What now?

The general guideline here is to return partner's suit unless there is clearly something better to do. There doesn't appear to be anything better to do than returning a heart. So let's assume you play the ♥10, the higher of your two remaining hearts. Declarer follows with the ♥3, partner plays the ♥6, and dummy's ♥A wins the trick.

Declarer leads the ♣K from dummy. Should you win this trick?

There doesn't appear to be any hurry to take this trick. It is often a good idea to hold up winning in this position to try and disrupt the communication with dummy's long suit by waiting until declarer has no cards remaining in the suit. So let's assume you decide not to win this trick.

You play low and let dummy's win the trick. Declarer and partner follow with low clubs. Declarer leads a low club from dummy, and you hold up again. Declarer wins the as partner discards the ♦2, a discouraging attitude signal. Declarer leads another club and, this time, you have to win the ♣A as partner discards the ♠2, another discouraging attitude signal. At least you have run declarer out of clubs, so declarer will need to find another way to reach dummy's winners. What next?

It's time to return your last heart, hoping partner can take some heart tricks. Unfortunately, declarer wins the ♥Q as partner follows with a low heart and a diamond is discarded from dummy. Declarer leads a low spade to dummy's ♠10. What do you play to this trick?

You don't want to let declarer reach dummy to take the club winners, so you might as well win this trick. However, it doesn't look as though you are going to be able to keep declarer from reaching dummy forever. What now?

With no hearts remaining, it looks as though your last chance is to hope to get to partner's hand in diamonds, even though partner discouraged earlier. You take a trick with the ♦A as declarer and partner follow with low diamonds and dummy ♦K falls.

You lead another diamond, but declarer wins and has the rest of the tricks with dummy's winners. You got your three aces and a trick with the ♥K, but that's all. Partner wasn't able to come up with a trick, and even though you established partner's heart suit, there was no entry to reach partner's established winners.

Was there anything else you could have done?

Let's see.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♥7 and declarer plays a low heart from dummy.

Before playing to the first trick, it's time to do some detective work and see what clues are available. What do you know from the auction and partner's opening lead?

Partner showed a five-card or longer heart suit during the auction with the Jacoby transfer bid and has presumably led fourth best. When partner leads fourth best, you can apply the Rule of Eleven to calculate how many cards higher than partner's cards are held by declarer. It's a two-step process. The first step is to subtract partner's card from eleven. 11 — 7 = 4. That means there are four cards higher than partner's ♥7 in the other three hands. The second step is to see how many higher cards are in dummy and in your hand. Dummy has one higher card, the ♥A. You have two higher cards, the ♥K and ♥10. That leaves exactly one card higher than the ♥7 in declarer's hand. What card do you think that is?

The clue is in the auction. Declarer bid 3NT, knowing North has five or more hearts. Surely West must have a potential heart stopper, which can only be the ♥Q. West wouldn't bid 3NT with only two or three hearts headed by the ♥J. So partner's hearts are headed by the ♥J, not by the ♥Q.

If you can establish partner's hearts as winners, can partner have an entry in another suit?

No!

Again, the clue comes from the auction. You have 16 high-card points, dummy has 15, and partner has 1 for the ♥J. That leaves just 8 high-card points outstanding and West must surely have all of them to have ventured 3NT.

If partner's only high card is the ♥J, is there any way you can turn it into an entry?

Yes!

You have to make declarer use the ♥Q on the first trick. How can you do that?

Play the ♥10 to the first trick rather than the ♥K!

If declarer lets your ♥10 win the trick, you can play a low heart to drive out the ♥A to establish the ♥K as a second trick for the defense. Together with your three aces, you will then have enough tricks to defeat the contract. So declarer has no choice but to win the trick with the ♥Q.

Declarer leads a low club. Partner plays a low club, and the ♣K is played from dummy. What should you play to this trick?

Although you could hold up winning this trick, there's no real need. Declarer will have an entry to dummy's clubs with the ♥A once the clubs are established. So let's suppose you win the ♣A.

You now have another critical play to make. What are you leading to trick three?

The ♥K!

If you lead your low heart, it will drive out dummy's ♥A, but the heart suit will then be blocked. On gaining the lead, you won't have a low heart left to lead to partner's ♥J. Having determined that partner has all the remaining hearts higher than the ♥7, you can afford to lead the ♥K.

Declarer and partner follow with low hearts, and dummy wins the ♥A. You have now established partner's remaining hearts as winners and have kept a link card, the ♥5, to get to partner's hand.

Declarer can start taking established club winners. Sooner or later, however, declarer is going to have to try to develop additional winners.

When declarer does lead a spade or a diamond, you can immediately win your ace. Now you can lead your carefully preserved low heart to get over to partner's hand. Partner can take two more established heart winners. That's enough to defeat the contract. And you still have your remaining ♦A for a second undertrick.

You've defeated 3NT by two tricks, taking three aces and three heart tricks.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 32<br>♥ J9876<br>♦ 86432<br>♣ 7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K975<br>♥ Q32<br>♦ QT9<br>♣ J63</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QJT<br>♥ A4<br>♦ K7<br>♣ KQT842</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A864<br>♥ KT5<br>♦ AJ5<br>♣ A95</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner did well in the auction to bid over your 1NT opening with only 1 high-card point. If you were left to play in 1NT, you would likely take only three or four tricks. Playing with hearts as trumps, you may finish with eight tricks.

Declarer might have made the contract by playing a low heart from dummy at trick one, however, it is up to you to find the only defense to defeat the contract by doing some detective work.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/07)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/04)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/11)

### By Date

Use the links below. '