---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-09'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/09'

next:
  text: '2025-02-11'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/11'
---

# 2025-02-10

In this column, can you keep the opponents from finding the winning defense?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A732<br>♥ QJ95<br>♦ T5<br>♣ 953</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East and West are vulnerable and your side is not. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♣. East passes. You must select a response.

With 7 high-card points you have enough to respond at the one level. With four cards in both major suits, you bid the hearts first, bidding up-the-line, looking for an eight-card major-suit fit. If partner has four hearts, you have immediately found a fit. If not, partner can bid 1♠ with a four-card spade suit and you will again have found a fit.

West passes. North raises to 4♥, and East passes. You have an opportunity to make a second call.

Partner's raise shows four-card support for hearts and a maximum-strength opening bid of about 19-21 points. With only 7 points, you don't want to go any higher and can pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠Q. Dummy comes down with the expected four-card heart support and 19 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton diamond.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K64<br>♥ AKT7<br>♦ Q7<br>♣ AK86</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A732<br>♥ QJ95<br>♦ T5<br>♣ 953</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In 4♥, you can afford to lose only three tricks.

In a suit contract, begin by counting the potential losers. Assuming the defenders' hearts divide no worse than 4-1, there are no heart losers since you hold all the top cards in the suit. You will be left with two potential spade losers in your hand after the ♠A and ♠K are gone. There are two diamond losers since the defenders hold the ♦A and ♦K. There will be a club loser remaining after dummy's ♣A and ♣K are gone. That's a total of five potential losers: two spades, two diamonds, and one club. Since you can afford only three losers, two losers will need to be eliminated to make the contract.

You could eliminate one of the spade losers by ruffing the fourth round in dummy after giving up a trick to the opponents. Alternatively, if the six missing spades divide 3-3, your fourth spade will become a winner. That's against the odds.

There's nothing you can do about the diamond losers in the suit itself. However, if the missing spades divide 3-3, you could discard a diamond from dummy on the fourth round of spades and then ruff the second diamond loser in dummy. Similarly, if the six missing clubs divide 3-3, you could discard a diamond from your hand on the fourth round of clubs.

So it looks as though you will need either the spades or the clubs to divide 3-3 so you can discard a diamond loser. That's against the odds, but there are two chances.

However, is there another consideration?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠Q. Suppose you decide to win this trick with dummy's ♠K, keeping the ♠A as an entry to your hand if you can establish an extra spade winner. East follows with a low spade and you follow with a low spade. No reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. You are missing five hearts. Both defenders follow when dummy's ♥A is played. Both follow when dummy's ♥K is played. The defenders' hearts have divided 3-2, so there is only one heart outstanding. You draw the last trump, which is with East. West discards a high diamond.

You have to give up a spade trick to establish the extra winner you need if the missing spades were originally divided 3-3. Since you want to keep the ♠A as an entry back to your hand, you play a low spade from both hands. West wins the ♠10 as East follows with a low spade. So far, so good.

Unfortunately, West now leads a diamond and East wins the ♦A. The defenders are taking their diamond winners before you have an opportunity to discard one of your losers. East returns a diamond, and West wins the ♦K. That's the third trick for the defense.

West leads a club and you win dummy's ♣K as East follows with a low club. You play a spade to the carefully-preserved Both defenders follow suit. The good news is your last spade is now a winner since the defenders' spades divided 3-3. The bad news is you can no longer use it to discard a diamond since the defenders have taken their diamond winners. You can take the spade winner and discard a club. However, that doesn't help much. You have another trump winner. And you have another club winner.

Unfortunately, the defenders have a club winner and the contract is down one. That looks a little unlucky. The defenders' spades divided 3-3 and, in fact, so did their clubs. However, when you lost a trick, the defenders took their diamond winners.

Was there anything you could have done?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠Q.

Before playing to the first trick, you need to consider the situation. You need the defenders' spades to divide 3-3 if you are to have a chance to make the contract. When you give up a spade trick, however, the defenders can take their diamond winners and it will be too late to discard a loser. It will be similar if you play on clubs, hoping that suit divides 3-3. By the time you give up a club trick, the defenders will likely realize they need to take their diamond winners. Is there anything you can do to make things more challenging for the defenders?

Yes! You have to lose a spade trick in order to establish the suit, even if the missing spades are divided 3-3, as you are hoping.

Why not lose the spade trick early, before the defenders know what's going on!

Let's see how that might work.

You play a low spade from dummy and East follows with the ♠5. How can you further encourage West to continue spades rather than switching to diamonds?

You can play the ♠7 rather than one of your low spades!

By keeping the ♠2 and ♠3 hidden, it will seem to West that East's ♠5 is the start of an encouraging high-low signal in spades. West is likely to think East holds the ♠A.

West falls for the deception and continues with the ♠J. You win dummy's ♠K, surprising West while keeping the ♠A as an entry to your hand for later. East finishes a low-high discouraging signal in spades, but it's too late for West to know East was sending a discouraging signal rather than an encouraging signal.

You still need some good fortune. Both defenders follow when the ♥A is played. Both also follow when the ♥K is played. That's good news. The defenders' hearts have divided 3-2. Another round of hearts draws the defenders' last trump. East makes an encouraging diamond signal on this trick... but it may be too late for the defenders. You need one more good break. You play the ♠A and both defenders follow suit! The defenders' spades have divided 3-3 and your last spade is now a winner. On the last spade, you discard one of dummy's diamonds. The contract is now safe. You can take dummy's two club winners.

You have to give up a club trick to the defenders, but that's okay. The defenders can take one of their diamond winners, but that's all. Having discarded a diamond from dummy, you can ruff the second round of diamonds.

You have a heart winner remaining and you have made the contract. You lost one spade, one club, and one diamond, but that's all.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K64<br>♥ AKT7<br>♦ Q7<br>♣ AK86</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJT<br>♥ 84<br>♦ K9642<br>♣ QT4</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 985<br>♥ 632<br>♦ AJ83<br>♣ J72</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A732<br>♥ QJ95<br>♦ T5<br>♣ 953</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Even with the missing spades dividing 3-3, you have to give up a spade trick and the defenders will have an opportunity to take their two diamond winners. Since you have to lose a spade trick no matter what, the key is to give up the spade trick early, before the defenders know what is going on.

You can add to the deception by playing the ♠7 at trick one, making it look as though East's ♠5 is the start of an encouraging signal in spades. Put yourself in the West position when the wins the first trick. Doesn't it look as though East holds the and is making an encouraging signal with something like ♠A-5-3-2? Wouldn't you continue with a spade at trick rather than the dangerous-looking shift to a diamond away from the ♦K?

When dummy's ♠K wins the second trick, the defenders may realize what's going on, but it's too late for them to recover. Taking your losses early works well on this deal... along with a fortunate lie of the spade suit.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/10)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/08)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/10#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.