---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-10'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/10'

next:
  text: '2025-02-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/12'
---

# 2025-02-11

In today's deal, how can partner help?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A8<br>♥ 85432<br>♦ AK96<br>♣ 54</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 1♠. You have to decide what call to make.

You have 11 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. If East had passed, you would likely have opened the bidding 1♥. However, you would now have to overcall at the two level, vulnerable. With such a weak suit, it seems best to pass for now.

West responds 1NT. The opponents have agreed to play this as a forcing 1NT, showing anywhere from about 6-12 points and forcing for one round. Your partner, North, passes, and East rebids 2♥. You have another chance to bid.

With East bidding hearts, it seems just as well that you didn't come into the auction with the weak five-card suit. You have no reason to bid at this point.

West jumps to 3♠. This sequence of bids by West - a forcing 1NT followed by a jump raise of opener's major - shows an invitational raise of about 10-12 points with exactly three-card support. Partner passes, and so does East. East has rejected West's invitation. You have one last chance to make a call.

You have no reason to do anything other than pass, ending the auction. You now have to choose an opening lead against East's 3♠ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

You generally want to lead an unbid suit. A suit headed by an ace-king is an obvious choice. You start with the top of the touching cards.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♦A and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q63<br>♥ KT6<br>♦ Q8<br>♣ AT763</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A8<br>♥ 85432<br>♦ AK96<br>♣ 54</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays a low diamond from dummy, partner plays the ♦2, and declarer follows with a low diamond. You are at the critical point in the defense. What are you playing to trick two?

Partner's ♦2 is a discouraging attitude signal. Partner isn't particularly interested in seeing you continue diamonds. You presumably have another diamond trick unless declarer started with a singleton diamond. You also have a sure spade trick. That's three tricks. You need two more.

Since East bid hearts, perhaps partner has something in clubs, such as the ♣K. Let's see what will happen on this deal if you switch to a club.

Suppose you lead the ♣5 at trick two, top of your doubleton. Declarer plays the ♣10 from dummy, partner plays the ♣J and declarer wins the ♣K. So much for hoping partner holds the ♣K.

Declarer now leads a low spade. Perhaps partner has the ♠K. Suppose you play low. Declarer plays dummy's ♠Q and it wins the trick as partner follows with a low spade. So much for partner holding the ♠K. EDeclarer continues with a spade from dummy, partner plays another low spade, declarer plays the ♠10, and you win the ♠A. What now?

You might as well take your ♦K before declarer can get rid of a diamond loser. Dummy's ♦Q falls, partner plays a low diamond, and declarer follows with the ♦10. You still need partner to come up with something if you are to defeat the contract. If partner has something in hearts, it won't go away since that's declarer's second suit. So let's assume you continue with your remaining club. Dummy's ♣A wins as partner and declarer follow with low clubs.

Declarer continues with dummy's last spade. Partner follows suit and declarer wins the ♠J. You discard a low heart. Declarer has drawn all your side's trumps. Declarer plays a heart to dummy's ♥K, and partner follows with the ♥Q. So much for any heart tricks. Things don't look good for the defense.

In fact, declarer claims the rest of the tricks with nothing left but heart and spade winners, making an overtrick. Partner couldn't contribute anything to the defense, so all you got were your three winners. Maybe you were lucky that East didn't accept the invitation and bid game.

Or maybe not. Let's go back to the first trick.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♦A, winning the first trick as everyone follows with low diamonds.

Having seen the dummy, it's a good idea to review the bidding before leading to the second trick. East opened the bidding 1♠ and then rebid 2♥ after West's 1NT response. Does that tell you anything?

Yes! Partner has at most one heart!

East has at least four hearts, dummy has three, and you have five. That leaves partner with only one heart - or none if East has a five-card heart suit. Does that give you any ideas?

Since you have the ♠A, you can give partner a heart ruff if you switch to a heart right now!

If partner is void, partner will get a ruff right away. If partner has a singleton, you can give partner a ruff when you gain the lead with the ♠A.

So, at trick two, you switch to a heart.

With nothing in hearts, you can lead the ♥8, top of nothing. Declarer plays the ♥10 from dummy, partner plays the ♥Q, and declarer wins the ♥A. Partner didn't have a heart void.

Declarer leads a low spade toward dummy. You have another decision to make. What are you playing to this trick?

You need to hop up right away with the ♠A.

If you are going to give partner a ruff, you don't want to let declarer draw partner's trumps.

A low spade is played from dummy, and partner plays a low spade. Now what? Should you take a trick with the ♦K before leading another heart?

No! Not if you trust in your plan. You want to keep the ♦K as an entry back to your hand.

You lead another heart. You might as well lead your highest remaining heart as a suit preference signal telling partner to return the higher-ranking of the two "obvious" suits, diamonds and clubs. Partner probably knows that you have the ♦K based on your opening lead, but it doesn't hurt to remind partner, just in case partner forgot what you led originally. Declarer tries the ♥K from dummy but, as you worked out, partner ruffs this trick with a low spade as declarer has to follow suit. Success! You gave partner a heart ruff. Based on your opening lead and your accompanying suit preference signal, partner returns a diamond. You win the ♦K as declarer and dummy follow suit. Now what?

Another heart! You might as well hope partner has another spade. In fact, partner gave a trump echo by playing a high spade on the first round of the suit and ruffing with a lower spade. That shows the possession of another trump.

A heart is played from dummy and partner ruffs with the ♠9. Declarer again has to follow with a heart. Partner did start with three trumps, as you hoped - or as you "knew" based on the trump echo.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but you've defeated the 3♠ contract. Your side got the two diamond tricks, and two heart ruffs.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 942<br>♥ Q<br>♦ J7432<br>♣ QJ92</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q63<br>♥ KT6<br>♦ Q8<br>♣ AT763</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KJT75<br>♥ AJ97<br>♦ T5<br>♣ K8</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A8<br>♥ 85432<br>♦ AK96<br>♣ 54</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Most of the time, you lead your own short suit to try to get a ruff. It's unusual to lead partner's short suit so you can give partner a ruff but, as you can see with this deal, there are times when it can be figured out. By finding the heart shift at trick two, you are able to defeat the contract. Any other continuation lets declarer make an overtrick. A two-trick difference!

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/11)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/07)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/18)

### By Date

Use the links below.