---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/12'

next:
  text: '2025-02-14'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/14'
---

# 2025-02-13

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 42<br>♥ AQJ97632<br>♦ 7<br>♣ T8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

This hand has only 7 high-card points plus 4 length points for the eight-card heart suit. That's not enough to open at the one level. With a strong eight-card suit, however, you can make a preemptive opening bid at the four level. That's more effective than opening 3♥, which would typically be based on a seven-card suit.

West passes, and partner, North, bids 4NT. East passes, and you have to choose what to do next.

Partner's 4NT is the Blackwood convention, asking about the number of aces you hold. Playing standard methods, you would reply 5♦, showing one ace. Playing key-card Blackwood, you would show one key card by replying 5♣ if playing 1430 or 5♦ if playing 0314 responses.

West passes, and partner now jumps all the way to 7♥. East passes, and you have another chance to make a call.

Partner apparently has enough information to determine that the contract belongs in a grand slam in hearts. You have no reason to do anything except pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 7♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>5♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>7♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣K, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ7<br>♥ KT85<br>♦ AQ64<br>♣ A</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 42<br>♥ AQJ97632<br>♦ 7<br>♣ T8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has been a little overly ambitious, but now it's up to you to bring home the grand slam.

In a grand slam, you still start by considering the potential losers you have. There are no heart losers, but there is a potential spade loser since you are missing the ♠K. There are no diamond losers since dummy's ♦A will take care of the only diamond in your hand. However, you will still have a club loser to take care of once dummy's ♣A is gone. That's two potential losers and you'll have to eliminate both of them.

There will be no difficulty eliminating the club loser. It can be ruffed in dummy.

The obvious sway to eliminate the spade loser is with the help of a finesse, hoping West holds the ♠K. That's a straightforward 50% chance. Is there another possibility?

Instead of trying the spade finesse, you could try the diamond finesse, hoping West holds the ♦K. If the ♦Q wins, you could then discard the spade loser on the ♦A. The diamond finesse is also a 50% chance.

So you have a choice of trying the spade finesse or the diamond finesse. Which should it be?

Whenever you have two chances, the best idea is to combine them if possible, improving the odds of making the contract. Will that work on this deal?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣K, and you have no choice but to win the first trick with dummy's ♣A. No reason to delay drawing trumps. Play a heart to the ♥A. The lone missing trump appears from East. That takes care of that. What next?

It looks as though you now have to decide which finesse to try, spades or diamonds, and hope you make the right guess. In a grand slam, you can't try both finesses. If whichever finesse you try first loses, there's no chance to go back and try the other finesse. Without any clues on the location of either the ♠K or the ♦K, let's assume you decide to try the spade finesse.

You lead a spade, West follows with a low spade, and you play dummy's ♠J. Unfortunately, East produces the ♠K. 7♥ is down one. Too bad you picked the wrong suit to try the finesse.

Let's go back and see if you might have better luck with the diamond finesse.

## Another Possible Play

You win the first trick with the ♣A. You draw the only outstanding trump.

Suppose you try the diamond finesse. You lead your singleton diamond, West follows with a low diamond, and you play dummy's ♦Q... East, however, takes the trick with the ♦K.

Down one again. You were unlucky that East held both the ♠K and ♦K, so it didn't matter which finesse you tried. Neither would work.

Was there something else you could have tried?

Let's look again.

## Recommended Play

To eliminate the spade loser, you have two straightforward 50% chances, the spade finesse and the diamond finesse. But there is a problem. As you just saw, the contract will go down right away if whichever finesse you start with fails. So can you still combine the chances in another fashion?

In spades, you have no option except the finesse. In diamonds, however, there is another possibility other than the finesse. You can hope a defender started with two or three diamonds including the ♦K. Then you can establish a trick with the ♦Q through ruffing. That will give you an extra chance. If the ♦K doesn't fall, you can still fall back on the spade finesse. Let's see how the play should go.

West has led the ♣K, and you win the first trick with dummy's ♣A. You draw the defenders' only trump with the ♥A. What now?

You can start trying to establish the ♦Q. You lead a diamond to the ♦A, giving up the possibility of a finesse. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. You lead a low diamond from dummy. This has the slight additional chance that East might hop up with the ♦K if holding it. East, however, plays the ♦10. You ruff, and West follows with a low diamond. No ♦K so far. You might as well ruff the club loser before you forget. That gets you back to dummy. You lead another diamond from dummy, and this time, you receive good news. East's ♦K appears. That's the extra chance you were hoping for. Ruff this and dummy's ♦Q has now become a winner.

You lead a spade toward dummy, but there's no need to risk the finesse. You have a sure thing. You win dummy's ♠A. You play dummy's established ♦Q and discard the spade loser.

With nothing left but trumps, the rest of the tricks are yours. You've managed to take all thirteen tricks without having to take a finesse.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ7<br>♥ KT85<br>♦ AQ64<br>♣ A</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T865<br>♥ <br>♦ J9863<br>♣ KQJ4</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ K93<br>♥ 4<br>♦ KT2<br>♣ 976532</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 42<br>♥ AQJ97632<br>♦ 7<br>♣ T8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Neither the spade finesse nor the diamond finesse would be successful on this layout. If you relied on a straight 50% chance, you would go down.

When faced with a choice between two finesses for a king in a side suit when either of which will give you the contract, first attack the suit that has a singleton and try to ruff out the king in that suit. If that doesn't succeed, take the finesse in the other suit.

On this deal, that boosts the odds from 50% to over 60%.

With no singleton in either suit, start by playing the ace of the longer suit, hoping for a singleton king. If the king doesn't fall, finesse in the shorter suit.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/13)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/14)

### By Date

Use the links below.