---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-13'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/13'

next:
  text: '2025-02-15'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/15'
---

# 2025-02-14

On this deal, will a stopper in the opponent's suit be enough to make your contract?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K974<br>♥ 8<br>♦ K8432<br>♣ K64</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. West is the dealer and opens with a preemptive 3♠ bid, typically showing a good seven-card suit but less than the values for a one-level opening. Your partner, North, makes a takeout double, showing at least three-card support for every unbid suit, or a very strong hand for this action at the three level. East passes, and you must choose a call after this start.

You have 9 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. There are four calls you might reasonably consider. First, you could pass, hoping to defeat 3♠ doubled one or more tricks. West is vulnerable, and doubled undertricks are potentially very profitable. Down one is 200 points, and each additional undertrick is 300 points.

Partner has asked you to pick a suit other than spades, so you could bid 4♦. The problem with 4♦ is that it's not a jump so it doesn't imply any values at all. You‘d be forced to bid 4♦ with a very weak hand such as:

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 974<br>♥ 83<br>♦ 85432<br>♣ 642</td>
	</tr>
</table>

If you bid only 4♦, partner won’t know you have a hand worth about 10 points.

To show some values, you could consider jumping to 5♦. However, you usually need about a combined 28 or 29 points to make a minor-suit game since you must take eleven tricks. Although partner should have a good hand to make a takeout double at the three level, partner doesn't need to have 18 or 19 points. Also, your ♠K is of dubious value opposite partner's presumed shortness.

The last possibility is 3NT. Although you have an unbalanced hand, you do have a spade stopper. You have a singleton heart, but partner has implied heart support, so partner should provide some stoppers there. Your five-card diamond suit could be a source of tricks since you presumably have an eight card or longer fit. To help decide among the various possibilities, it's useful to consider how strong a hand partner is likely to have in this auction. About how many combined points do you think the partnership holds?

Partner's takeout double has committed your side to at least the four level if you bid a suit. Although you can't be certain of an exact point count, it would be reasonable to hope partner has at least 15 high-card points. Combined with your 10 points, the partnership should have about 25 or more points, which is usually enough to go for a game contract. Since nine tricks are easier to take than eleven, it seems reasonable to go for the game bonus by bidding 3NT rather than 5♦. So let's go with that.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>3♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠J, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ AK72<br>♦ A976<br>♣ QJ973</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K974<br>♥ 8<br>♦ K8432<br>♣ K64</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has only 14 high-card points but was counting dummy points on the assumption that you would bid a suit. If you had bid a suit, partner's hand would be worth an additional 5 dummy points for the spade void. Playing in notrump, however, the void is a negative factor rather than a positive factor. Perhaps dummy's length in clubs will come in handy.

It's time to make a plan, starting with counting the sure tricks you have. You don't start with any sure spade tricks, but West has led the ♠J. Whatever East plays to the first trick, you can get a trick with the ♠K. You have two sure heart tricks, the ♥A and ♥K. There are no sure club tricks since the opponents have the ♣A. You have two sure diamond tricks, the ♦A and ♦K. That's five tricks: a spade, two hearts, and two diamonds. You need four more.

You aren't getting any more than one trick from spades and two from hearts.

You can promote two club winners by driving out the ♣A. If the five missing clubs are divided 3-2, you will get two more tricks through length. Even if clubs divide 4-1, you may get two extra tricks - if the ♣10 falls singleton, for example.

If the four missing diamonds in the defenders' hands are divided 2-2, you will get three extra diamond tricks through length. If the diamonds are divided 3-1, you can establish two extra tricks through length by giving up a trick. If they are divided 4-0, you can still establish an extra trick but might have to give up the lead twice.

So you might be able to develop the extra tricks you need in clubs, or you might need to get some help from the diamond suit.

Is there any danger?

Certainly. Notrump contracts are often a race to see which side can reach its trick target first. You're aiming for nine tricks while the defense is looking for five tricks. The opponents have a head start by leading their long suit. What information do you have from the auction and West's opening lead of the ♠J?

It's not surprising that West has led a spade. West has shown a good seven-card suit during the auction. What does the lead tell you about the layout of the opponent's spades?

The lead of the promises the ♠10 and denies the ♠Q. So East holds the ♠Q. It's possible that East also holds the ♠A, but that's unlikely since West would rarely open at the three level, vulnerable, on a suit headed by the ♠J. Most likely, West has a seven-card suit headed by the ♠A-J-10 and has led the top of the interior sequence.

So you need to get your nine tricks without the opponents getting five or more tricks first.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠J. You don't need dummy's low hearts, so you can afford to discard one. East plays the ♠Q. You have reached a critical point in the play. Should you win the first trick with the ♠K?

You might reason that if you don't take the ♠K now, you'll never get a spade trick at all since West holds the ♠A-J-10. This could be your one and only chance to win a spade trick. Let's see what will happen if you win the ♠K.

Suppose you win the ♠K. You now need to take eight more tricks before the opponents gain the lead. You can start with the diamonds. If they are divided 2-2, you will have three extra tricks right away. You play the ♦2, West follows with a low diamond, and you win the trick with dummy's ♦A as East follows with the ♦10. You continue with a low diamond from dummy. East plays the ♦Q, you win the ♦K, and West follows with the ♦J. Great news! All your remaining diamonds are winners.

Now all you need is one trick from clubs. You could take your diamond tricks now, but you'll still be short a trick. East likely has the ♣A since West, the preemptor, should not have any aces. Maybe you can sneak a low club from dummy past East. Suppose you cross to dummy's ♥A. West follows with a low heart and East plays the ♥Q. You lead a low club from dummy, but East jumps up with the ♣A. East isn't about to let you "steal" a club trick.

East returns partner's suit, leading back the ♠5. West wins the ♠8. West now takes five more spade winners. West did start with a seven-card suit. You have to throw some of your established winners away.

You have the last two tricks, but 3NT is down three. Perhaps you should have taken your diamond and heart winners and settled for down one.

Or could you have made the contract?

Let's go back to the first trick.

## Recommended Play

When West leads the ♠J and East plays the ♠Q, you have to decide what to do.

The opponents' auction has provided you with the clues you need to make the contract. West presumably started with a seven-card spade suit. You have four spades. So East has only two spades.

What if you allow East to win the first trick with the ♠Q?

You are giving up your sure spade winner, but you are trying to turn East into a safe opponent. Let's see how this can help.

East returns the ♠5. What are you playing to this trick?

Anything except the ♠K. You know West holds the ♠A.

Suppose you play the ♠7 and West wins the ♠8. What can West do now?

If West takes the ♠A, you will then get a trick with the ♠K. West can continue spades to set up the suit, but East will have no more spades to lead after winning the ♣A. Suppose West switches to a heart without taking the ♠A. You won't win any spade tricks, but you now have a chance to get the tricks you need from clubs and diamonds. You know East has no spades left to lead.

Since you don't have any spade tricks, you need at least two club tricks. You play a low club from dummy, East plays low, you play the ♣K and it wins as West follows with a low club. You were correct that West didn't have both the ♣A and ♠A. Besides, West would have continued spades to establish the suit if holding the ♣A as an entry. You lead another club, and West shows out. You play dummy's ♣J to drive out the ♣A and promote dummy's ♣Q into a winner. The clubs have divided 4-1. You are going to have to hope the diamonds divide more favorably.

East leads another heart, driving out your last heart stopper. You take a trick with dummy's ♦A and both defenders follow suit. That's a good start. You continue with a diamond from dummy. East plays the ♦Q, you play the 0K, and... West follows with the ♦J. That's the break you needed. You can now take the three established diamond winners and the ♣Q.

East has the last trick, but you've made the 3NT contract. You took two hearts, two clubs, and five diamonds, but no spade tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ AK72<br>♦ A976<br>♣ QJ973</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJT8632<br>♥ 643<br>♦ J5<br>♣ 8</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q5<br>♥ QJT95<br>♦ QT<br>♣ AT52</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K974<br>♥ 8<br>♦ K8432<br>♣ K64</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

One of the main reasons you bid 3NT was your spade stoppers. Ironically, to make the contract, you had to refuse your only chance to win a spade trick! If you took your spade winner when you had the chance, you'd go down.

If you passed the double, you'd defeat 3♠ doubled one trick for a score of 200, less than the score for making your game. If you jumped to 5♦, you would have made that contract when the diamonds divided 2-2.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/14)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/13)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/15)

### By Date

Use the links below.