---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-16'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/16'

next:
  text: '2025-02-18'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/18'
---

# 2025-02-17

In this column, in what order should you take the finesses?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A54<br>♥ AKJT75<br>♦ 83<br>♣ 65</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East and West are vulnerable and your side is not. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♦. East passes. You must select a response.

With 12 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit, there should be enough combined strength for at least game when partner has enough to open the bidding at the one level. The priority, however, is to first determine Where the partnership belongs. You start by responding at the one level in the six-card major suit.

West passes. North rebids 1NT, and East passes. You have an opportunity to make a second call.

Partner has shown a minimum-strength balanced hand of about 12-14 points. Since partner should have at least two hearts, you've now found an eight-card or longer major-suit fit. With the answers to both How High and Where, you can take the partnership to game in 4♥.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠J. Dummy comes down with a doubleton heart, 12 high-card points, and a balanced hand.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q63<br>♥ 63<br>♦ AQJ4<br>♣ QJ82</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A54<br>♥ AKJT75<br>♦ 83<br>♣ 65</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In 4♥, you can afford to lose only three tricks.

In a suit contract, begin by counting the potential losers. There is a potential heart loser since the opponents hold the ♥Q. There will be two potential spade losers remaining once the ♠A is gone. There is a potential diamond loser since the opponents hold the ♦K. There are two club losers since the opponents hold both the ♣A and ♣K. That's a total of six losers: one heart, two spades, one diamond, and two clubs. You can afford only three losers so three losers will need to be eliminated to make the contract.

You can avoid a heart loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♥Q. That's better odds that playing the ♥A and ♥K, hoping for a singleton or doubleton ♥Q. You want to follow the guideline of eight ever, nine never - with eight or fewer combined cards, go with the finesse; with nine or more, play the ace-king.

You might also avoid a spade loser with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♠K. That becomes less likely when West leads the but West might be leading from an interior sequence headed by the ♠K-J-10. The alternative is to hope East started with a singleton or doubleton ♠K.

The diamond suit also provides the possibility of avoiding the loser with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♦K. Even if the finesse loses, an extra diamond winner will be created which might be used to discard a loser. If the finesse does work, it could be repeated to create an extra winner on which to discard a loser.

You can't do anything about the club losers in the suit itself. The best hope is to discard a club loser on an extra winner. You might be able to create an extra club winner by leading twice toward the ♣Q and ♣J but, by then the defenders will likely have taken all their winners in the other suits.

In Considering the Order, you likely need to delay going after the trump suit while trying to establish the extra winner needed in the diamond suit.

Is that a good enough plan?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠J. Suppose you try the ♠Q from dummy. Unfortunately, East produces the ♠K. So much for that chance. You decide to win the ♠A, just in case West's lead was a singleton.

Since you need the diamond finesse - both to avoid a diamond loser and to discard one of the spade or club losers - that needs to take priority. You are in the right place to try the diamond finesse. You lead a low diamond to dummy's ♦J and East follows with a low diamond. At least that finesse worked. Things are looking up.

Suppose you cross back to your hand with a high heart. That guards against West holding a singleton ♥Q. Both defenders, however, follow with low hearts. Back to the diamond suit. The remaining low diamond is led and, when West follows with another low diamond, dummy's ♦Q is finessed. As expected, this also wins. You've avoided the diamond loser and created an extra winner on which to discard a loser. Since you are in dummy for the last time, you take the diamond winner, the ♦A. On this, you choose to discard a spade loser.

Now all you need is to avoid a heart loser. You lead dummy's remaining heart and, when East follows with another low heart, you finesse the ♥10, going with the "eight ever, nine never" guideline. Good news! The finesse wins. Bad news! West shows out. East started with four hearts including the ♥Q.

Not much you can do now unless the defenders make a mistake. You lead a club toward dummy and West hops up with the ♣A.

West leads the ♦K. If East were to ruff, you could overruff and make the contract. However, East discards a spade and you ruff.

Oh well, if you can get to ruff twice more, you may get to take all your heart tricks. You lead another club to dummy's ♣J and East wins the ♣K.

East leads a spade and West wins. West leads another spade and you get to ruff this trick.

Unfortunately, you are on lead and can do no better than take a trick with the ♥K.

East gets the last trick with the ♥Q. The contract is down one. You had some good luck: the diamond finesse worked and the ♥Q was favorably placed. However, you also had some bad luck: the ♠K was unfavorably placed and the hearts divided 4-1.

Could you still have come out on top?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠J. You try the but East produces the ♠K. Perhaps you should have played low, hoping East started with a singleton or doubleton ♠K, but it's too late for that now. You win the ♠A.

With two spade losers and two club losers, you are going to need the diamond finesse to both avoid a diamond loser and to create an extra winner on which to discard a loser. At the same time, you need to avoid a heart loser and the guideline is to take the finesse. Missing five hearts including the ♥Q, can you afford to play a high heart first to guard against a singleton ♥Q with West?

If the five missing hearts divide 4-1, playing a high heart first will guard against a singleton ♥Q. However, it won't help if West holds a singleton ♥9, ♥8, ♥4, or ♥2 since you would no longer be able to repeat the finesse if it works. So the odds favor taking a repeated finesse rather than playing a high heart first.

So you want to take both a repeated heart finesse and also a repeated diamond finesse. With limited entries between the two hands, you will need to do things in the right order. Let's see how the play should go.

You are in the right place to take the first diamond finesse. You lead a low diamond and finesse dummy's ♦J. When this wins, you are off to a good start.

Now, however, you need to turn your attention to the heart suit since you are in the right place to take the first heart finesse. You lead a low heart from dummy and, when East follows with a low heart, you finesse the ♥10. More good news. The finesse wins as West follows with a low heart. If this finesse had lost, the opponents could take their spade and club winners to defeat the contract two tricks.

Time to turn the attention back to diamonds. You are in the right place to lead your remaining low diamond and finesse dummy's ♦Q. This wins, and you have created the extra diamond winner you need. In dummy for the last time, you take the ♦A and discard a spade loser. You've eliminated both a diamond loser and one of the spade losers.

Time to go back to the trump suit. You lead dummy's last heart and, when East follows with a low heart, you repeat the heart finesse, playing the ♥J. As expected, this wins, but West shows out, discarding a club. You've done well to protect against a 4-1 heart division. The ♥A draws one of East's remaining trumps. The ♥K draws the remaining trump, East's ♥Q.

You still have a spade and two clubs to lose, but you have made the contract. You eliminated the heart loser, the diamond loser, and one of the spade losers.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q63<br>♥ 63<br>♦ AQJ4<br>♣ QJ82</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ JT97<br>♥ 4<br>♦ K952<br>♣ A973</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ K82<br>♥ Q982<br>♦ T76<br>♣ KT4</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A54<br>♥ AKJT75<br>♦ 83<br>♣ 65</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Although the expected division of five missing cards is 3-2, the next most common division is 4-1. A 5-0 division is rare.

Missing the ♥Q, the odds favor taking a finesse against the ♥Q. If dummy held three hearts, you could afford to play one high heart first to guard against a singleton ♥Q with West since you would still be able to take two finesses when East started with four hearts. With only two hearts in dummy, however, you will only be able to finesse once if you take a high heart first. Since the odds are 4-1 that West's singleton will be a low heart rather than the ♥Q, the odds are heavily in favor of taking a first round finesse. When the first finesse succeeds, you can repeat the finesse in case East started with four hearts, as on the actual deal.

Since you have to take repeated finesses in both hearts and diamonds on this deal, you need to be careful in the order you play the cards. To manage the entries you have to first take a diamond finesse, then a heart finesse, then back to a second diamond finesse and, finally, a second heart finesse.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/17)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/15)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/20)

### By Date

Use the links below.