---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-17'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/17'

next:
  text: '2025-02-19'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/19'
---

# 2025-02-18

In today's deal, will your opening lead make a difference in the outcome?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ A963<br>♦ T987<br>♣ K642</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South and both sides are vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens 1♥. Your partner, North, passes, and East responds 1♠. You have to decide whether to get involved in the auction.

You have only 7 high-card points and no five-card suit. There's no reason to overcall. Although you could add 3 dummy points if considering a takeout double, that's still not enough to enter the auction, especially vulnerable. You pass for now. Perhaps you'll have a chance to bid later.

West makes a jump raise to 3♠, showing four-card support for spades and a hand worth about 17 or 18 points. Partner passes, and East bids 4NT, the Blackwood convention. The auction is back to you.

You have no reason to do anything except pass.

West replies 5♦, showing one ace - or makes the appropriate response to show one key card if the partnership is playing Key Card Blackwood. Partner passes, and East jumps to 6♠. You have another call to make.

Naturally, you pass.

West and partner also pass, ending the auction. You now have to choose an opening lead against East's 6♠ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>5♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>6♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

The opening lead can often be critical to the outcome of the contract. It's especially important against a slam since there is so much at stake. This hand presents a number of possibilities. Let's consider each of them.

The disadvantage of leading a trump is that you are helping declarer accomplish one of declarer's usual goals, drawing the defenders' trumps. Also leading a singleton trump may trap partner's holding in the suit. Partner might hold three or more spades including the ♠Q, for example. Declarer might not guess how to play the trump suit if you don't help out. In this auction, West has shown hearts and spades. So West will be short in diamonds or clubs or both. However, it's not clear declarer will want to ruff losers in dummy. If declarer does have losers in the minor suits, declarer is more likely to be planning to discard them on dummy's heart suit. If you were leading against a grand slam, a trump is usually a consideration, but it doesn't look like the best choice here.

Turning to the heart suit, there's another popular saying: "Always lead aces against a slam." Any maxim that includes the word "always" is immediately suspect. There are certainly times to lead an ace against a slam. There is the possibility, if you don't take it right away, declarer may discard any losers in the suit. Or partner might hold the king. Or you may be able to give partner a ruff if partner has a singleton. Here, however, none of those reasons seem to apply. Dummy has five or more hearts, so it's unlikely declarer has any way to discard all of them. Also, dummy won't have a lot of clubs or diamonds, so it's unlikely any heart losers in declarer's hand can be discarded. Since West bid hearts, it's unlikely partner holds the ♥K and, if partner does hold the ♥K, it's unlikely to go away. It's unlikely partner has a singleton heart. For that to be the case, the opponents would have an eight-card heart fit and might have played there rather than in spades. Leading the ♥A is more likely to establish winners for the opponents than for your side. So this doesn't appear to be the time to lead the ♥A.

The third choice is to lead a club. Leading a club away from the ♣K is an aggressive lead. Leading a club in this case, of course, has its maxim: "Try to avoid leading away from an unsupported honor." It could cost a trick if the opponents hold the ♣A and ♣Q between the two hands. However, it could also create a winner if partner holds the ♣Q. It would also work well if partner holds the ♣A, although that's unlikely since East checked for aces.

The fourth choice is to lead a diamond. Leading the ♦10 is a passive lead. With the solid sequence, it's unlikely to give up a trick. However, it's also less likely to create a trick. Since partner presumably doesn't hold the ♦A, partner will need at least the ♦K, and perhaps the ♦Q as well.

So the choice seems to come down to an aggressive club lead or a passive diamond lead. No one likes to possibly give up the slam-going trick on opening lead, so let's see what will happen if we choose the "safe" diamond lead.

## Possible Defense

Suppose you decide to lead the ♦10. West puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJT7<br>♥ KQJT8<br>♦ AQ<br>♣ J8</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥5<br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ A963<br>♦ T987<br>♣ K642</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Seeing the ♦A-Q in dummy looks promising. However, when declarer plays the ♦Q from dummy, it wins the trick as partner plays the ♦2 and declarer the ♦J. No diamond tricks for the defense. At least your lead didn't give away any tricks for the defense.

Declarer leads the ♠Q from dummy and both partner and you follow with low spades. Declarer now leads the ♥K from dummy. Partner and declarer follow with low hearts. There doesn't seem to be any reason to hold up, especially as declarer might hold a singleton heart since partner's ♥2 could be the start of a low-high count signal showing three hearts. You win the ♥A. What next?

It doesn't actually matter as declarer quickly claims the rest of the tricks.

Would a different lead have made a difference?

Let's go back and try again.

## Recommended Defense

You have already rejected the lead of a trump since it will likely just help declarer. You've also rejected the lead of the ♥A since it will likely just help declarer establish dummy's heart suit. So the choice is between a passive diamond lead and an aggressive club lead.

When the opponents bid to a small slam in notrump, it is usually best to make a passive lead, trying not to give up a trick. The opponents likely have about 33 combined high-card points, so your ♥A and ♣K would likely be the only high cards your side holds. When the opponents bid to a small slam in a suit contract, the opponents are likely to be valuing distribution and may have fewer high cards than in notrump. Partner can hold anything. Also, a passive lead will often give declarer the opportunity to establish winners in a suit on which to discard losers. You are likely to need to develop your side's tricks early, before declarer can go to work.

Is there anything else that might persuade you to lead a club rather than a diamond on this deal?

In the auction, West bid 5♦ in reply to East's Blackwood inquiry. This gave partner an opportunity to make a lead-directing double to suggest a diamond lead. Partner would do that with the ♦K-Q, for example, or perhaps with only the ♦K if partner really didn't want you to lead a club. Partner's failure to double gives you a slight inference that partner might prefer a club lead to a diamond lead.

So let's see the difference it will make on this deal if you are courageous enough to make the aggressive opening lead of a low club.

You lead the ♣2, and dummy comes down. Dummy is what you might have imagined. A good five-card heart suit, four-card support for spades, and a medium-strength hand—16 high-card points plus dummy points for the two doubletons. Dummy's club holding makes you nervous. You might have led right into declarer's ♣A-Q.

Declarer plays the ♣8 and partner... produces the ♣Q. Good partner! Declarer wins the ♣A.

Declarer plays the ♠A as you and partner both play low spades. Declarer now leads the ♥5. Should you hold up winning the ♥A?

No!

There are times to hold up taking an ace, but this isn't it! First, the ♥5 may be a singleton. Second, you've got off to a great opening lead. You don't want to waste it!

You win the ♥A as dummy and partner follow with low hearts. There's no doubt what to do next. You play the ♣K before declarer has an opportunity to discard any club losers. When declarer has to follow to the trick, you know you've defeated the contract.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but 6♠ is down one. Your side got a heart trick and a club trick.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 2<br>♥ 742<br>♦ 65432<br>♣ Q953</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJT7<br>♥ KQJT8<br>♦ AQ<br>♣ J8</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AK98543<br>♥ 5<br>♦ KJ<br>♣ AT7</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ A963<br>♦ T987<br>♣ K642</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The opening lead is critical in determining the fate of the slam. In general, you should lead aggressively against a small slam in a suit contract. You tend to lead passively against a small slam or grand slam in notrump. A passive lead also applies when leading against a grand slam in a suit contract, typically leading a trump.

On this deal, you were lucky to find partner with the ♣Q. It was also unlucky for declarer that there was so much duplication in the diamond suit. If declarer had held a third diamond, the slam would have made easily.

Notice that if declarer held the ♣Q on this deal instead of partner, it wouldn't have cost anything to lead a club. Declarer would always be making the contract by establishing the hearts and discarding any club losers.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/18)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/11)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/25)

### By Date

Use the links below.