---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-19'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/19'

next: false
---

# 2025-02-20

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K6<br>♥ AKQ<br>♦ AQJ5<br>♣ AK74</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

You have 26 high-card points. That's much too much to open the bidding at the one level since you have enough strength for game in your own hand. Instead, open the bidding with a strong artificial 2♣.

West passes, and partner, North, responds with an artificial waiting bid of 2♦. East passes, and you have to choose a rebid.

The hand is balanced. The standard way to describe it is with a rebid of 3NT, showing about 25-27 points. Some partnerships have other ways to show this type of hand, but let's go with the straightforward jump to 3NT.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠3, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 97<br>♥ 8632<br>♦ T982<br>♣ Q83</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K6<br>♥ AKQ<br>♦ AQJ5<br>♣ AK74</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner doesn't have much, as might be expected given the hand you hold.

You start making a plan by counting the sure tricks. You don't start with any spade winners, but West has led a spade. Whatever East plays to the first trick, you'll get a trick with the ♠K. There are three sure heart tricks, the ♥A, ♥K, and ♥Q. There are also three sure club tricks, the ♣A, ♣K, and ♣Q. Finally, you have one sure diamond trick, the ♦A. That gives you eight top tricks: a spade, three hearts, three clubs, and one diamond. You need to find one more.

You aren't getting more than one spade trick.

In hearts, however, you may get an extra trick if the six hearts in the defenders' hands are divided 3-3. The odds of that are about 36%.

The situation is similar in clubs. If the defenders' six clubs are divided exactly 3-3, your fourth club will become a winner. Again, the odds are about 36%.

In diamonds, you might be able to get three extra tricks with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♦K. The odds of that are 50%. Even if the finesse loses, you will have developed two extra diamond tricks.

It would seem the best plan is to take the diamond finesse. It offers the best odds and, if it wins, you will make two overtricks. If it loses, you will still have enough tricks to make the contract.

Is there any problem with this plan?

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠3. You play low from dummy, and East wins the first trick with the ♠A as you follow with your low spade. East returns the ♠4. You win the ♠K as West follows with the ♠2. What now? Which suit should you go after next - hearts, clubs, or diamonds?

It may be tempting to start with the diamond finesse, a 50% chance, rather than looking for a favorable 3-3 break in either the club suit or the heart suit, a 36% chance. So let's see what will happen if you try the diamond finesse now.

Since you're hoping to trap the ♦K in East's hand, you'll need to start by leading a diamond from dummy. You can use the club suit to cross to dummy's winner, the ♣Q. Both defenders follow with low clubs. You lead dummy's ♦10, hoping East will cover an honor with an honor if holding the ♦K. If East plays a low diamond, you can plan to play a low diamond in your hand. If the ♦10 wins, you can repeat the finesse. You would then get three diamond tricks if East started with four diamonds with the ♦K or all four tricks if the diamonds divided favorably. You'd make at least one overtrick and possibly two. East follows with a low diamond, and you play a low diamond. West, however, produces the ♦K. The rest of your diamonds are now winners.

Unfortunately, when West leads the the opponents can take three more spade winners. 3NT is down one. You've lost one diamond and four spades. The option with the best odds did not work.

Let's go back and see what else you might have done.

## Recommended Play

You need an extra trick, and that can come from hearts, clubs, and diamonds. Even though the diamond finesse offers the best odds, there is a problem. West has led a spade and the opponents have nine spades between them. One defender must hold five spades. As you just saw, if you lose a trick to the ♦K, the defenders will have at least four spade winners to take.

When faced with more than one option for the tricks you need, you want to combine options if possible. Can you do that on this deal?

Yes... but you must be careful in the order in which you try the various options. Let's see how the play should go.

West has led the ♠3, and East wins the first trick with the ♠A. East returns the ♠4 and you are forced to take the trick with the ♠K. You are at a critical point in the play. With three suits that can offer a ninth trick, which suit should you start with?

Hearts.

If the defenders' hearts are divided 3-3, dummy's fourth heart will become a winner, but you will need an entry to reach it. The only entry to dummy is the ♣Q, so you can't afford to start with clubs. And you don't want to risk the diamond finesse if hearts prove to be divided 3-3.

Both defenders follow to the ♥A. Both defenders also follow to the ♥K. So far, so good. You continue with the ♥Q. West shows out, discarding a diamond. The defenders' hearts have divided 4-2 and East still has a high heart remaining. So much for chance number one.

You are now down to two chances, clubs and diamonds. Which one should you try next?

Clubs.

If you try the diamond finesse, you won't be able to fall back on clubs if the finesse loses. If you start with clubs and they don't divide favorably, you can still fall back on the diamond finesse. Does it matter in which order you play the clubs?

Yes!

The only entry to dummy is the ♣Q. If you play the ♣Q before you have found out whether the clubs are breaking, you won't be able to get back to dummy to try the diamond finesse if clubs fail to break. How do you manage to keep both chances alive?

You start with one of the high clubs from your hand.

Both defenders follow with low clubs. So far, so good.

You continue with the other high club from your hand.

Again, both defenders follow suit. The chance in the club suit is still alive. You lead a third round of clubs to dummy's ♣Q. You will now find out whether the clubs have divided favorably. If they don't break, you will be in the right place at the right time to try your third chance, the diamond finesse. On the actual deal, both defenders follow to the third round of clubs. That's good news. The fourth club in your hand is now a winner.

Next, you lead a diamond from dummy. You might as well lead the ♦10. Some defenders love to cover an honor with an honor. East plays a low diamond, however. Now what?

Play the ♦A.

If the clubs had not divided 3-3, you would have to try the diamond finesse at this point. With the clubs behaving nicely, however, you no longer need to risk the finesse.

You can now take a trick with the thirteenth club. That's your ninth trick.

The defenders have the last three tricks, but that's okay. You've made the 3NT contract with a spade trick, three hearts, one diamond, and four club tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 97<br>♥ 8632<br>♦ T982<br>♣ Q83</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT832<br>♥ 97<br>♦ K64<br>♣ J96</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AJ54<br>♥ JT54<br>♦ 73<br>♣ T52</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K6<br>♥ AKQ<br>♦ AQJ5<br>♣ AK74</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In the planning stage, you sometimes have more than one possibility for getting the extra tricks you need. If you can choose only one possibility, you want to go with the one that has the highest probability of success. Wherever possible, however, you want to combine two or more chances.

On the actual deal, if you simply go with the 50% diamond finesse, you would go down.

In combining chances, you want to start with the one that leaves another chance available if the first one fails.

On this deal, for example, by testing the hearts, and then the clubs, you are in a position to try the third chance, diamonds, if neither of the first two works. You may also have to arrange the order of the chances so you are in the right place at the right time to try your next chance, as on this deal. By being able to combine all three chances on this deal, the odds of success improve to about 80%.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/20)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/17)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/20#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.