---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-20'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/20'

next:
  text: '2025-02-22'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/22'
---

# 2025-02-21

On this deal, the contract hinges on one card.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 63<br>♥ AJ62<br>♦ 964<br>♣ KJ85</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. West is the dealer and opens 1♦. Your partner, North, makes a takeout double, and East passes. You must decide what call to make after this start.

As advancer, you have 9 high-card points and a four-card heart suit. Since you are forced to bid something when East passes, if you bid only 1♥, partner will assume you have somewhere between 0 and about 8 points. To show some values, you need to jump to 2♥. The jump advance is only invitational, showing about 9-11 points.

West passes, and partner raises to 4♥. East passes, and you have another chance to make a call.

You've certainly done enough with the invitational 2♥ bid. You pass.

West passes, ending the auction. You are now the declarer in 4♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠10, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQ2<br>♥ K853<br>♦ J7<br>♣ QT9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 63<br>♥ AJ62<br>♦ 964<br>♣ KJ85</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With only 24 combined high-card points, you have reached an aggressive game. You now have to find a way to take ten tricks.

How many losers are there in 4♥?

You have at least one potential heart loser since you are missing the ♥Q. You could possibly have more than one heart loser if the five missing hearts aren't divided 3-2 since you ae also missing the ♥10 and ♥9. There are no spade losers. In fact, you have an extra spade winner which you could use to discard a loser in another suit. You have three potential diamond losers in your hand. There is also a sure club loser since you are missing the ♣A. So, assuming the hearts don't break badly, you have five potential losers: a heart, three diamonds, and a club. You need to eliminate two of them.

There's no problem eliminating the third diamond loser. You can either plan to ruff it in dummy or to discard it on dummy's extra spade winner.

However, you will still have to lose two diamonds and a club. So it comes down to avoiding a heart loser. With eight hearts in the combined hands, the guideline eight ever, nine never suggests that finessing the ♥J is better than playing the ♥A and ♥K, hoping the ♥Q will fall doubleton.

Let's see if that will work on this deal.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠10. You win the trick with dummy's ♠Q as East plays a low spade. What next?

There's no reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. You don't want the defenders unexpectedly ruffing one of your winners. You play dummy's ♥K, and everyone follows with low hearts. You lead a low heart from dummy, and East follows with the ♥9. You are at the critical point in the play. What are you playing to this trick?

Since the general guideline suggests finessing the ♥J at this point, let's see what will happen if you do. You play the ♥J, but West shows up with the ♥Q.

West now takes a trick with the ♣A. West then takes another trick with the ♦A. East plays the ♦8, likely showing an encouraging attitude signal. West continues with the ♦Q. East plays the ♦2, finishing the high-low attitude signal, as you have to follow suit with another low diamond. That's the fourth trick for the defense.

West leads a third round of diamonds which you ruff in dummy. You can now draw the rest of the defenders' trumps and have the rest of the tricks. However, 4♥ is down one, losing one club, two diamonds, and one heart.

Could you have made the contract?

Let's consider the play again.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠10, and you win the first trick with dummy's ♠Q. You draw the defenders' trumps by playing the ♥K. Both defenders follow with low hearts. You lead a low heart from dummy, and East follows again with a low heart. What should you play to this trick?

Looking at the heart suit in isolation, with eight cards in the combined hands, the odds favor finessing the ♥J. Will that be the best play on this deal?

No!

Let's look at the available clues from the auction and the opening lead. Which defender holds the ♠J?

East.

West has led the ♠10. Since West would lead the top of touching cards, East must hold the ♠J.

Which defender holds the ♦K?

East.

If West held the ♦A-K, West would presumably have led the ♦A. Similarly, if West held the ♦K-Q. West would presumably have led the ♦K rather than the ♠10.

Which defender holds the ♣A?

West.

West opened the bidding and East passed throughout. You've already determined that East holds the ♦K. If East held the ♣A as well, East would have enough to respond to the opening bid. Also, there are only 16 high-card points missing. If East held 7 of them, West wouldn't have enough to open the bidding.

Now the key question. Which defender holds the ♥Q?

West.

East already holds the ♦K and ♠J. If East also held the ♥Q, East would have enough to respond to the opening bid. Also, if West holds the ♦A-Q and ♣A, West still needs the ♥Q to have enough to open the bidding.

Since you have determined that West must hold the ♥Q, you "know" the finesse isn't going to work.

So, you play the ♥A!

Your only hope is that West started with a doubleton ♥Q.

You are rewarded for your detective work when West follows with the ♥Q. You aren't going to lose any heart tricks. You draw East's last trump with the ♥J. The rest is easy. You can start promoting the club winners. You lead a club to dummy's ♣9 which wins the trick as West chooses to play low. You continue with the ♣Q. This time, West wins the ♣A. You already knew West held that card.

West can see the writing on the wall and takes a trick with the ♦A. You knew from the auction and opening lead that West held that card. West takes another trick with the ♦Q. You also knew West held that card.

You have the rest of the tricks. As you can see, East has the ♦K and ♠J, the cards you pinpointed in East's hand after the opening lead. You've made the 4♥ contract, losing a club and two diamonds, but no hearts.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQ2<br>♥ K853<br>♦ J7<br>♣ QT9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T974<br>♥ Q7<br>♦ AQT53<br>♣ A7</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J85<br>♥ T94<br>♦ K82<br>♣ 6432</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 63<br>♥ AJ62<br>♦ 964<br>♣ KJ85</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Are you lucky to find West with a doubleton ♥Q?

Certainly! However, once you pinpoint that West must hold the ♥Q, you have no choice. You don't want to take a finesse that you "know" is going to lose. The important thing to notice on this deal is the inference you can draw from West's opening lead of the ♠10. If an opponent has bid a suit, the opponent almost always leads that suit when it is headed by the ace-king or king-queen. Unless the suit has been supported, however, an opponent will rarely lead from a suit headed by the ace-queen.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/21)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/20)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/22)

### By Date

Use the links below.