---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-23'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/23'

next:
  text: '2025-02-25'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/25'
---

# 2025-02-24

In today's column, how will you handle the critical suits?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKJT5<br>♥ Q6<br>♦ AKQ73<br>♣ 5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. North and South are vulnerable, and East and West are not. As dealer there is a chance to choose an opening call.

You have 19 high-card points plus 1 length point for each five-card suit. That puts the hand at the top of the range for an opening bid at the one level. With two five-card suits, you start with the higher-ranking, spades.

West passes. North responds 1NT. East passes, and you have to select a rebid.

Partner's response shows at least 6 points, so there are enough combined points to go for at least a game contract. You still have to determine Where and you don't want responder to pass your rebid. You can make a game-forcing jump shift into the second suit, diamonds.

West passes. North gives preference to 3♠, and East passes. The auction is back to you.

Since partner didn't raise spades right away, it's likely partner has only a doubleton spade. You could rebid the diamonds in case responder has three-card diamond support, but it looks better to go for the ten-trick game rather than the eleven-trick game. Let's go with a straightforward continuation to 4♠.

Everyone passes. The auction has ended and you are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣Q. Partner puts down dummy with a doubleton spade, and only 5 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card club suit.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q3<br>♥ 8754<br>♦ 62<br>♣ K7432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJT5<br>♥ Q6<br>♦ AKQ73<br>♣ 5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Making 4♠ will require ten tricks.

In a suit contract, begin by counting potential losers. There are unlikely to be any spade losers since you hold the top five honors. Only if the six missing spades divide 6-0 will you not be able to draw all the defenders' trumps. There are two heart losers since the defenders hold both the ♥A and ♥K. There is a club loser since the defenders hold the ♣A. There will be two diamond losers remaining once the ♦A-K-Q are gone. There are five potential losers, two hearts, one club, and two diamonds. Two of the losers must be eliminated to make the contract.

There is nothing which can be done about the two heart losers and the club loser. So the focus will have to be on avoiding the diamond losers.

That won't be a problem if the six missing diamonds are divided 3-3. That's against the odds, but is there another choice?

If the six missing diamonds divide 4-2, you may be able to ruff a diamond loser in dummy. The last diamond will then be a winner through length.

Will that be good enough on this deal?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣Q. It's very unlikely West holds the ♣A since defenders rarely lead away from an ace on opening lead. Suppose you play a low club from dummy. West's ♣Q wins the first trick as East makes an encouraging signal. West continues with the ♣J. Again you play low from dummy. East finishes the encouraging high-low signal and you ruff with a low spade.

If you draw all the defenders' trumps, you won't be able to ruff a diamond if the diamonds aren't dividing exactly 3-3. Suppose you decide to test the diamonds first. Both defenders follow to the ♦A. Both defenders follow to the ♦K. So far, so good. When you continue with the ♦Q, West follows. You discard a heart from dummy. Unfortunately, East ruffs with a low trump. The defenders' diamonds have divided 4-2.

East takes a trick with the ♥K. East takes another trick with the ♥A. That's the fourth trick for the defense. East leads another heart and you ruff as West follows with a heart.

The diamond suit still isn't established. You lead another diamond and, this time, you ruff with dummy's ♠Q so East can't overruff. East discards a club. You can lead dummy's last trump and draw the defenders' remaining trumps, which takes three rounds.

Your last diamond is an established winner, but the contract is down one. The missing diamonds divided 4-2 so, even if you drew the defenders' trumps so East couldn't ruff the third round, you would have to lose a diamond trick.

Was there anything which could be done?

Let's go back and try again.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣Q, winning the first trick as you play low from dummy. West continues with the ♣J. Again you play low from dummy, hoping East started with a doubleton ♣A. However, East finishes a high-low signal. You ruff with the low trump.

If you draw all the defenders' trumps, the contract will go down unless the defenders' diamonds are divided exactly 3-3, which is against the odds. If you try to take the top three diamond winners before drawing any trumps, you will also go down if a defender ruffs one of the winners. Is there any way you can handle the likely 4-2 diamond division?

Yes! Let's see the order in which the play should go. You take a trick with the ♦A. Both defenders' follow suit. You take a second round of diamonds with the ♦K. Again, both defenders follow suit. That's good news. The defenders' diamonds are divided no worse than 4-2. Now the key play.

You lead a low diamond and ruff with dummy's ♠Q!

If both defenders follow suit, the defenders' diamonds will have divided 3-3. On the actual deal, East shows out, discarding a heart, so the diamonds have divided 4-2. However, you've now established the diamond suit.

You can use dummy's remaining low trump to start drawing trumps. Both defenders follow to the first round of trumps. No 6-0 split. Both defenders follow to a second round of trumps. That's good news. The defenders' spades have divided no worse than 4-2, so the contract is assured. On the next round of trumps, West shows out, discarding a diamond. That's okay. The defenders' spades have divided 4-2 but East has only one more remaining. You draw East's last trump.

It's now safe to take the remaining high diamond. Your last diamond has been established as a winner which you take. That's your tenth trick.

The defenders have the last two tricks, but you have made the contract. You lost two hearts and one club trick, but that was all. Both the missing spades and missing diamonds divided 4-2, but you were able to handle the play.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q3<br>♥ 8754<br>♦ 62<br>♣ K7432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 92<br>♥ J932<br>♦ T854<br>♣ QJ9</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 8764<br>♥ AKT<br>♦ J9<br>♣ AT86</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJT5<br>♥ Q6<br>♦ AKQ73<br>♣ 5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When you are missing six cards in a suit, you expect the missing cards to divide 4-2 rather than 3-3.

On this deal, you are missing both six spades and six diamonds. You need to play the cards in the right order to handle both suits. You can afford to ruff a third round of diamonds with dummy's high trump after taking only two of the top diamonds. That establishes the diamond suit whether it is divided 3-3 or 4-2. You then have a trump left in dummy which allows you to draw four rounds of trumps when the missing spades divide 4-2. Then you can take the remaining established diamond winners.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/24)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/22)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/27)

### By Date

Use the links below.