---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-24'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/24'

next:
  text: '2025-02-26'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/26'
---

# 2025-02-25

In today's deal, which suit should you establish?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J72<br>♥ KQT96<br>♦ KQ4<br>♣ 63</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. West is the dealer and opens 1NT, showing a balanced hand with about 15-17 points. Your partner, North, passes, and East raises to 3NT. You have to decide what call to make.

With 11 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit, you might have competed at a lower level, but now the auction is much too high to do anything except pass. You pass.

West and partner also pass, ending the auction. Partner is now on lead against West's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>


## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♠6, and East puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ A9<br>♥ 42<br>♦ AJT86<br>♣ Q974</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J72<br>♥ KQT96<br>♦ KQ4<br>♣ 63</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The ♠9 is played from dummy. You play the ♠J, and declarer wins the first trick with the ♠K.

Declarer leads the ♦9, partner plays a low diamond, a low diamond is played from dummy, and you win the ♦Q. You are at the critical point in the defense. What are you leading to trick three?

The guideline is to return partner's suit unless there is clearly something better to do. You have a good heart suit and it looks as though you have another entry with the ♦K. As little as the ♦J from partner will be enough for you to drive out declarer's ♥A and establish your heart suit. Is this the "...unless there is something clearly better to do" situation?

Let's see. Let's suppose you switch to the ♥K. Declarer wins the ♥A as partner plays the ♥7.

Declarer leads another diamond and, when partner follows with a low diamond, finesses dummy's ♦10. You win the ♦K. As you expected, you've regained the lead.

You take a trick with the ♥Q, hoping to see the ♥J from either declarer or partner. However, a low heart appears from declarer and the ♥8 from partner. You continue with another heart, but declarer wins the ♥J. That's too bad.

Declarer proceeds to take the rest of the tricks.

Would it have been better if you returned partner's suit instead of trying to establish your own heart suit?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♠6. The ♠9 is played from dummy, you play the ♠J, and declarer wins the ♠K. What do you know about the spade suit?

Partner's spades will be established once the ♠A is gone!

How can you tell that?

You can apply the Rule of Eleven. Subtracting partner's ♠6 from eleven leaves five cards higher than the ♠6 in the other three hands. You can see two in dummy, the ♠A and ♠9. You have two, the ♠J and ♠7. Declarer has one, the ♠K. So partner has all the remaining high spades other than dummy's ♠A.

Declarer leads the ♦9 and, when partner follows with a low diamond, plays low from dummy. Declarer is hoping your partner started with the ♦K or the ♦Q or both the ♦K and ♦Q. You know this is declarer's unlucky day. You win the ♦Q.

Having applied the Rule of Eleven to partner's opening lead, you know this is a time to return partner's suit. You lead back the top of your remaining doubleton, and declarer has no choice but to win dummy's ♠A.

Declarer leads a club from dummy and wins the ♣K. Declarer now repeats the diamond finesse, hoping your partner has the ♦K. Unluckily for declarer, this is the 25% of the time when both finesses fail.

You return your last spade and are happy to see declarer show out. Partner started with a six-card spade suit. Partner now takes three more spade winners.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but the 3NT contract is down two. Your side got two diamond tricks and four spade tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QT8653<br>♥ 87<br>♦ 72<br>♣ T52</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K4<br>♥ AJ53<br>♦ 953<br>♣ AKJ8</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ A9<br>♥ 42<br>♦ AJT86<br>♣ Q974</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J72<br>♥ KQT96<br>♦ KQ4<br>♣ 63</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Returning partner's suit works well on this deal, but that doesn't mean it should be completely automatic. There is the proviso "unless there is something clearly better to do."

On this deal, your heart suit is tempting to lead after winning the first diamond trick, but it is not "clearly" better than returning partner's suit, especially if you apply the Rule of Eleven to partner's opening lead. If your heart holding included the ♥J, or there was a doubleton ♥J in dummy, it would "clearly" be reasonable to shift to a heart. If partner's opening lead had indicated declarer had one or more higher cards remaining, then it would be reasonable to shift to a heart, hoping partner holds the ♥J. On the actual deal, however, it is "clear" to return partner's suit.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/25)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/18)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/25#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.