---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-26'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/26'

next:
  text: '2025-02-28'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/28'
---

# 2025-02-27

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J<br>♥ AQT8765<br>♦ 843<br>♣ 65</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make in first position.

You have only 7 high-card points plus 3 length points for the seven-card heart suit. That's not enough to open at the one level. With a good seven-card suit, however, the hand is suitable for an opening preemptive 3♥ bid in first position. It both describes the hand to partner and takes away a good deal of bidding room from the opponents.

West passes, and partner, North, raises to 4♥. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Partner's raise to 4♥ could be a further preemptive action or with a strong enough hand to hope the partnership can make game. You have no idea which. You've described your hand and any further decisions are up to partner. You pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦K, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A6543<br>♥ KJ9<br>♦ A76<br>♣ JT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J<br>♥ AQT8765<br>♦ 843<br>♣ 65</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has three-card support, two aces, and a doubleton club, enough to hope you can make game. It's now up to you to reward partner's confidence.

As declarer, start by considering the number of potential losers you have. The trump suit is solid, no losers there. There are also no spade losers. Dummy's ♠A will take care of the singleton spade in your hand. There will be two potential diamond losers once dummy's ♦A is driven out. It looks like that will happen soon since West has led a diamond. There are also two potential club losers since the opponents have the top clubs. That's a total of four losers: two diamonds and two clubs. You need to eliminate one loser.

There is no way to eliminate the diamond losers within the suit itself, and similarly with the club suit. The only hope is to discard one of the losers on an extra winner in dummy. However, there aren't any extra winners in dummy. Is there anything that can be done?

It may be possible to establish an extra winner in the spade suit. Since the opponents hold seven spades, the opponents' spades will need to be divided 4-3. You will then need to ruff three spades in your hand. The odds of the missing spades dividing 4-3 are about 60%, which is better than nothing. So the plan is to try to establish dummy's fifth spade as a winner.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦K. You have your first decision. Should you win this trick or hold up?

It probably wouldn't hurt to hold up one round before winning the ♦A. It's unlikely either defender started with a singleton diamond. However, there's no reason to take a chance. Let's suppose you win the ♦A. You are now at the critical point in the play. What are you leading at trick two?

In most situations, you want to draw trumps as quickly as possible to prevent the defenders from ruffing your winners. With ten trumps in your combined hands, there are three trumps outstanding. On this deal, you also have another priority. You want to establish a spade winner to discard a loser in your hand. Does it matter which one you start with, draw trumps or establish spades?

Let's see what will happen if you start with a round of trumps.

Suppose you lead a trump to the ♥A. Both defenders follow with low hearts. What now? Should you draw the remaining trump?

No. You should go to work on the spade suit. If you can establish a spade winner, you will need an entry to reach it. After playing one round of trumps, the only entries to dummy are in the trump suit, the ♥K and ♥J. So you lead the ♠J, East plays a low spade, you take the ♠A as West follows with a low spade. You lead a spade from dummy and ruff in your hand. Both defenders follow suit again. You play a second round of hearts. That gets rid of the defenders' remaining trump and, at the same time, gets you to dummy so you can continue to establish a spade winner. You lead another spade and ruff it. Both defenders again follow suit. Good news the defenders followed to three rounds of spades, but there is still one higher-ranking spade outstanding. So you cross to dummy with the ♥K. You play another spade and ruff it. When East plays the ♠10, dummy's remaining spade becomes a winner.

There is a problem, however. Without any entries to dummy, you can't reach the established spade winner to discard a loser.

You're left with four losers in your hand: two diamonds and two clubs. 4♥ is down one.

Was there something you could have done?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Play

To make 4♥, your only hope is to establish dummy's fifth spade as a winner. You can then use it to discard one of the diamond or club losers from your hand. For that to work, you will need a favorable 4-3 break in the defenders' spades. Is there anything else you need to be concerned about?

Yes!

You will need to get to dummy three times to ruff spades and a fourth time to reach the established spade winner.

West has led the ♦K. The opponents are about to remove one of dummy's entries by driving out the ♦A. Do you have enough remaining entries to dummy?

Yes, but you will need to use them carefully. Let's see how the play should go.

You win the first trick with the ♦A. What now?

You can't afford to play even a single round of trumps.

With the ♦A gone, dummy's hearts are all needed as entries. You must immediately start to establish the spade winner you need.

At trick two, you take dummy's ♠A. Both defenders follow with low spades. You continue with a low spade. East plays the ♠K. It can't hurt to ruff with a high heart. You have lots of high hearts. West again follows with a low spade. So far, so good. The defenders' spades haven't divided 7-0 or 6-1. Now it's time to draw a round of trumps... but only one. Play a low heart to dummy's ♥9, your first entry back to dummy. Both defenders follow with low hearts. There's still one heart outstanding, but that's not important right now. You use the entry to lead and ruff another spade. Again, you might as well ruff with one of your high hearts, making sure you keep lower-ranking hearts to get to dummy. When both defenders follow suit for a third time, the contract becomes secure. The defenders' spades have divided 4-3. However, there's still a high spade outstanding. You cross back to dummy's ♥J. That draws the defenders' last trump. Another spade is led from dummy, and you again ruff with a high heart. East follows with the ♠10. That's the defenders' last spade.

Dummy's last heart is still available as the final entry you need. The hard work is done. You can now take dummy's established spade winner and discard one of your losers. It doesn't matter whether it is a diamond loser or a club loser. You just have to get rid of one of them.

The defenders still have three tricks to take, but the last trump is your tenth trick. You've made the 4♥ contract, losing only three tricks instead of four.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A6543<br>♥ KJ9<br>♦ A76<br>♣ JT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q92<br>♥ 32<br>♦ KQT5<br>♣ K987</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KT87<br>♥ 4<br>♦ J92<br>♣ AQ432</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J<br>♥ AQT8765<br>♦ 843<br>♣ 65</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, there is only one possible hope for making the contract. You need to have the defenders' seven spades divide 4-3. However, that's only part of the planning process. You also need to plan out the order of play. You need three entries to dummy outside the spade suit. When the only entries to dummy are in the trump suit, you can't afford to squander those entries by drawing trumps prematurely. Those entries are needed for communications.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/27)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/24)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/28)

### By Date

Use the links below.