---
prev:
  text: '2025-02-27'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/27'

next:
  text: '2025-03-01'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/01'
---

# 2025-02-28

On this deal, can you safely ruff a loser?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKQJ84<br>♥ J43<br>♦ K62<br>♣ 4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make with this hand.

With 14 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit, this is a solid 1♠ opening bid.

West overcalls 2♥. Partner cuebids 3♥, the opponent's suit, and East passes. The auction is back to you.

Partner's cuebid of the opponent's suit shows three-card or longer support for spades and an invitational or better hand - 10 or more points. With 16 points, you have enough extra strength to go for game in spades even if partner has only an invitational hand. A bid of 3♠ would decline the invitation, so you jump to 4♠.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥A, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 9532<br>♥ 92<br>♦ A53<br>♣ AJT9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQJ84<br>♥ J43<br>♦ K62<br>♣ 4</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has four-card support and an invitational hand - 9 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton heart.

You start making a plan by counting the potential losers. How many are there?

The trump suit is solid. There are no spade losers. In the heart suit, there are three potential heart losers in your hand. There are no club losers since dummy's ♣A will take care of the singleton club in your hand. However, you will be left with a diamond loser once the ♦A and ♦K are gone. That's four potential losers in total, three hearts and a diamond. One of the losers will need to be eliminated.

As dummy has only a doubleton heart, the straightforward plan is to ruff the third round of hearts in dummy, after giving up two tricks in the suit.

Is there any potential danger?

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥A. What information do you have about the heart suit?

West is likely to hold the ♥K in addition to the ♥A since West is presumably leading the top of touching honors. Also, West overcalled 2♥ during the auction. So West has a five-card or longer heart suit and presumably some additional high cards for a two-level overcall.

West's ♥A wins the first trick as you play low from dummy, East plays the ♥7, and you follow with a low heart. West continues with the ♥K, winning the second trick as you play dummy's last heart, East plays the ♥5, and you follow with another low heart. You were counting on having to lose two heart tricks. West now surprises you a little by leading with the ♥Q. You were planning to give up two heart tricks and ruff the third round in dummy. It looks as though West is doing the work for you. You are at the critical point in the play. What do you plan to play from dummy?

Let's do some detective work. How are the hearts divided between the defenders' hands?

You know from West's overcall that West has a five-card or longer heart suit. You know from the play so far that they are headed by the ♥A-K-Q. Exactly how many hearts did West start with?

Six.

East has followed to the first two rounds with the ♥7 followed by the ♥5. That is a high-low count signal, showing an even number of hearts. So West must have started with six hearts and East with only two. You want to avoid ruffing this trick with a low spade such as the ♠2, ♠3, or ♠5. East can easily overruff that with the ♠6 or ♠7. So, it looks as though your only chance is to ruff with dummy's ♠9, hoping East doesn't hold the only missing higher-ranking spade, the ♠10. Let's see what will happen if you do decide to ruff this trick.

You play dummy's ♠9. Unfortunately, East overruffs with the ♠10. East returns a trump, which you win with the ♠A. All the defenders' trumps are gone. You have, however, already lost three tricks.

Eventually, you have one more diamond trick to lose after your ♦A and ♦K are gone. You were unlucky that East held the ♠10, the only trump that could overruff dummy's ♠9.

What else could you have done?

Let's look again.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♥A, winning the first trick as East plays the ♥7. West continues with the ♥K, and East finishes the high-low signal with the ♥5. That's okay. You knew you had to lose two heart tricks. West now leads the ♥Q.

Although it is tempting to follow the original plan of ruffing your last heart loser in dummy, you need to consider is there is potential danger in doing it. East can overruff dummy if East holds the ♠10. If one of your spade honors were in dummy, you could safely ruff with a high trump. If the defenders' trumps were already drawn, there would also be no danger. However, that is not the case. If you ruff and East overruffs, you'll still be left with an unavoidable diamond loser and the contract will be down one. If you don't ruff, West's ♥Q will win the trick. What can you do?

You can discard a low diamond from dummy on the ♥Q!

That lets West win the third trick as East discards a club. How does that help?

Since you now have only two diamonds left in dummy, you will be able to ruff your diamond loser in dummy - safely - after trumps are drawn.

Let's see how the play will go. It won't do any good for West to lead another heart. If East ruffs, you'll be able to overruff. So West switches to a diamond. You win in dummy with the ♦A.

You draw a round of trumps. Both defenders follow suit. There is one trump outstanding. You draw another round of trumps, removing East's remaining ♠10.

Now it's safe to ruff a loser. You play the ♦K. You lead your last diamond and ruff it in dummy.

You don't have any more losers. You've made the 4♠ contract, losing three heart tricks but no diamond tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 9532<br>♥ 92<br>♦ A53<br>♣ AJT9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ AKQT86<br>♦ J94<br>♣ K73</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T7<br>♥ 75<br>♦ QT87<br>♣ Q8652</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQJ84<br>♥ J43<br>♦ K62<br>♣ 4</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The technique used to make the contract is referred to as a loser on a loser. Your detective work tells you that ruffing the third heart loser in dummy won't work since East could overruff if holding a higher-ranking trump. You are going to lose the trick anyway. When you "know" a card is a loser, look for another losing card you can play on the same trick so you end up losing one trick instead of two.

On this deal, you lose the third heart trick, but you get rid of your diamond loser on the same trick.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/02/28)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/27)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/03)

### By Date

Use the links below.