---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-01'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/01'

next:
  text: '2025-01-03'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/03'
---

# 2025-01-02

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKT753<br>♥ 6<br>♦ AQT<br>♣ K84</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. West is the dealer and passes. Partner, North, also passes and so does East. You have to decide what call to make in fourth position.

You have 16 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit. That's a medium-strength hand for an opening bid at the one level. You open in the six-card major.

West overcalls 2♥, and partner, North, raises to 2♠. East advances to 3♥, and the auction is back to you.

With a medium-strength opening and partner showing about 6-9 points, you would usually make a game try. The opponents have not left you any room, although some partnerships agree to play a double here as a game try. If you don't have that agreement, it's easier to simply jump to 4♠ since 3♠ would be only competitive. Besides, it's likely partner doesn't have too much wasted value in hearts.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥Q, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 642<br>♥ A74<br>♦ KJ95<br>♣ 762</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKT753<br>♥ 6<br>♦ AQT<br>♣ K84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has a nice 8 points and would have accepted if you made a game try.

Your first step is to consider the potential losers you have in 4♠. You are missing four spades, including the ♠Q-J-9-8. There will be no losers if the missing spades are divided 2-2. You may have one spade loser if the spades are divided 3-1, and you could have two losers if West holds all four of the missing spades. There are no heart losers since partner's ♥A will take care of the singleton heart in your hand. Although you have the ♣K, there are three potential club losers since the opponents have all the remaining high clubs. There are no diamond losers. In fact, you have an extra diamond winner in dummy on which you might be able to discard one of your other losers. Assuming you don't have more than one spade loser, there are four potential losers: a spade and three clubs. You need to eliminate at least one loser.

In spades, you could simply hope the four missing spades are divided 2-2, but there are other possibilities. For example, if you start with a high spade and the or falls from West, you can consider crossing to dummy to lead a spade, planning to finesse the ♠10, hoping East has the remaining spade honor. In fact, that is better odds than hoping West started with a doubleton ♠Q-J.

To avoid a club loser, you could plan to lead a club from dummy toward your ♣K, hoping East holds the ♣A. That's a 50% chance. A better plan is to first discard a club on dummy's extra diamond winner. Then you might make an overtrick if East has the ♣A. However, you will need to draw the defenders' trumps before you can safely take the diamond winners.

So it looks as though you will be okay even if you have to lose a spade trick. You'll be able to discard a club loser once the trumps are gone. Are there any potential problems?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥Q. You win the first trick with dummy's ♥A as East plays the ♥8 as an encouraging attitude signal. What next?

You want to draw the defenders' trumps so you can take the diamond winners and try the club finesse. So let's assume you play a low spade from dummy and East plays the ♠J. You win the ♠K as West follows with the ♠9. That's good. The spades haven't divided 4-0. You are now at the critical point in the play. What next?

It appears East started with a singleton or perhaps a doubleton. It looks okay to play a second high spade. Let's see what will happen if you do. Suppose you lead the ♠A. West shows out, discarding a heart. Dummy and East follow with low spades. That leaves East with the ♠Q.

With a sure spade loser, you can't afford three club losers. There's no point giving up the spade trick to East since East will be able to trap your ♣K if West holds the ♣A. So you might as well start taking the diamond winners. If East has three or more diamonds, you'll be able to discard a club on dummy's fourth diamond. Then you won't care which defender holds the ♣A. Both defenders follow to the first round of diamonds. Both defenders also follow to the second round of diamonds. So far, so good. West follows to the third round of diamonds but, unfortunately, East shows out. Worse, East ruffs the diamond with the ♠Q.

East leads the ♣J. You'll still be okay if East holds the ♣A, but it doesn't look good. Sure enough, when you try the ♣K, West wins the ♣A. West takes another trick with the ♣Q. You'll still be okay if West doesn't have any more clubs. West, however, has another club to lead and the defenders take a third club trick.

You have the rest of the tricks, but the defenders have defeated the 4♠ contract, taking three clubs and a spade. It was unfortunate that the spades didn't break, and East didn't have three diamonds, and the ♣A was unfavorably located.

Could you have overcome all this bad luck?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥Q, and you win the first trick with dummy's ♥A.

As you have seen, East is the dangerous opponent. If East gains the lead before all the trumps are drawn, East can lead a club, trapping your ♣K when West holds the ♣A. West, however, is the safe opponent. If West gains the lead, West can't lead a club without giving you a trick with the ♣K.

You can afford to lose a trump trick. You just can't afford to lose a trump trick to East. So you should play the trump suit in a manner that guarantees if a trump trick is lost, it is lost to West, not East.

You lead a low spade from dummy. If East follows with a low spade, what you should plan to do?

Play the ♠10!

This will win if East has both the ♠Q and ♠J. If, as is more likely, it loses to the ♠Q or ♠J in West's hand, that's okay. West will be on lead and can't hurt you by leading a club. Whatever West leads, you can win and draw the remaining trumps with the ♠A and ♠K. You can then safely take the diamond winners.

East, however, plays the ♠J. You can't afford to let East win the trick, so you play the ♠K, winning the trick as West follows with the ♠9. What now?

You still can't afford to have East win a spade trick, so you need to lead the next round of spades again from dummy. You can get to dummy by overtaking the ♦Q with the ♦K. You lead another spade from dummy and East follows with the ♠8. What are you playing?

The ♠10!

You don't mind if this loses to the ♠Q. The lead will then be in West's hand, the safe opponent, and all the trumps will be drawn.

On the actual deal, the ♠10 wins. Even better. You aren't going to lose any spade tricks. The draws the last trump, East's ♠Q. You take a trick with the ♦A. You can overtake the ♦10 with the ♦J. On dummy's extra diamond winner, you can discard one of your club losers. Now you can try for a second overtrick by leading toward the ♣K. That loses to West's ♣A, but that's okay.

You have one more club to lose, but that's all. You've made the 4♠ contract with an overtrick, losing only two club tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 642<br>♥ A74<br>♦ KJ95<br>♣ 762</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 9<br>♥ QJT93<br>♦ 8743<br>♣ AQ9</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QJ8<br>♥ K852<br>♦ 62<br>♣ JT63</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKT753<br>♥ 6<br>♦ AQT<br>♣ K84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Whenever you see a suit position like this deal presents, more often than not, you try to do everything in your power from having your right-hand opponent lead through your king. Here it is East who is the player you don't want to see lead a club through your ♣K. You can afford to ose a spade trick to West, even if the defenders' spades are divided 2-2, since West can't hurt you with a club lead. Once trumps are removed, you can discard a club on a diamond and lead toward the ♣K for a possible overtrick.

If East follows with a low spade on the first lead from dummy, you can play the ♠10 since you are safe if West wins the trick. When East chooses to play an honor on the first spade, you win, cross to dummy, and plan to insert the ♠10 if East follows low. If East shows out on the second spade, win the ♠A and give up a spade to West, ensuring the contract.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/02)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/30)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/03)

### By Date

Use the links below.