---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-02'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/02'

next: false
---

# 2025-01-03

On this deal, can you avoid losing a trump trick?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKT753<br>♥ 6<br>♦ AQT<br>♣ K84</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens 1♦. Your partner, North, passes, and East responds 1♠. You have to decide what call to make after this start.

You have 10 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. Although that would be enough to overcall at the one level, neither the hand nor the suit is good enough to directly overcall 2♥. Best to pass and await developments.

West rebids 2♣. Partner passes again, and East also passes. The auction is back to you.

Now the situation is a little different. You are in the balancing position. If you pass, the auction is over. Since West hasn't jumped and East presumably has a minimum response, it's likely the points are reasonably equally divided between the two sides. It's up to you to compete for the auction if you can.

You have enough to compete by bidding 2♥. You could buy the contract, or perhaps you can push the opponents a little higher, where you might be able to defeat them. Partner won't expect you to have that much since you didn't overcall 2♥ earlier.

West competes further by rebidding 3♣. Partner now gets into the action by advancing to 3♥. East passes, and the auction is back to you once more.

You were only competing for partscore with the 2♥ bid, and you accomplished one of your purposes which was to push the opponents a little higher. However, partner has decided to compete a little further as well. You have no reason to want to go any higher.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 3♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>3♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠K, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 93<br>♥ KJ54<br>♦ J543<br>♣ KT5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J642<br>♥ A9732<br>♦ KQ<br>♣ 43</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 8 high-card points, about what you might expect but, with four-card heart support, decided to compete to the three level.

How many potential losers are there between the combined hands?

You have at least one potential heart loser since you are missing the ♥Q. You might have a second loser if one defender has all four of the missing hearts. You have four potential spade losers in your hand. It looks as though you are about to lose two spade tricks right away since West has led the suit. You have only one diamond loser since you are missing the ♦A. Finally, there are two potential club losers. Although dummy has the ♣K, you are missing the ♣A, ♣Q, and ♣J. So that's a total of eight potential losers, a heart, four spades, a diamond, and two clubs. You need to cut the number of losers in half if you are to make the contract.

In hearts, the guideline with nine hearts in the combined hands missing the ♥Q is to play the ♥A and ♥K rather than trying the heart finesse - eight ever, nine ever. That works if the ♥Q is singleton or doubleton.

In spades, you have two sure losers but should be able to eliminate the other two by ruffing them both in dummy or discarding one of them on an extra diamond winner in dummy once the ♦A is driven out.

You can't do anything about the diamond loser or the ♣A, but you might be able to avoid a second club loser with the help of a finesse, leading toward dummy's ♣K and hoping West holds the ♣A.

So it appears you have four sure losers, two spades, a diamond, and a club, and will have to focus on avoiding the other four losers, a heart, two spades, and a club. Do you have any clues to help you so far?

The auction and opening lead have provided some clues about the location of the defenders' high cards and the defenders' distribution. West opened the bidding 1♦ and then bid and rebid clubs. What does that tell you about West's distribution?

West presumably has at least five diamonds and five clubs.

Rebidding the clubs without being supported by East shows a five-card suit. West, however, opened 1♦ first, so the diamonds are presumably as long as, or longer than, the clubs. East presumably has only one or two diamonds and three clubs since East passed West's 2♣ bid rather than giving preference back to diamonds.

West has led the ♠K. Which defender holds the ♠A?

Presumably East.

Unless West is leading from a doubleton ♠A-K, West is either leading the top of touching honors or a singleton or top of a doubleton in East's suit.

Which defender holds the ♣A?

Since West opened the bidding and bid twice more, West must have the majority of the other missing high cards, improving the odds that West holds the ♣A.

So you already have a good idea of the defenders' distribution and location of high cards. Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠K. It wins the first trick as East makes an encouraging attitude signal with the ♠8. West continues with the ♠Q which wins the second trick as East finishes the encouraging high-low with the ♠7. Those were two tricks you knew you had to lose. West now switches to the ♣A, winning the third trick for the defense. That's good news. You had to hope West held the ♣A, and now you don't need to take a finesse in clubs. East follows with the ♣2. West continues with the ♣Q and you finally win a trick with dummy's ♣K. East plays the ♣7, continuing what is likely a low-high count signal, confirming your initial analysis that West started with five clubs and East with three.

You are now at a critical point in the play. It's time to play the trump suit. Holding nine cards in the combined hands, the basic guideline is to play the ♥A and then the ♥K. Let's see what will happen if you do.

Suppose you play a low heart to your ♥A, and both defenders follow suit. There are still two trumps outstanding. When you continue with a second round of trumps, West shows out and discards a diamond. You can take the trick with dummy's ♥K, but East's ♥Q has now been promoted to a winner.

You have to lose a diamond to West's ♦A. You have already lost four tricks and have one more to lose, the ♥Q. 3♥ is down one.

Let's see if there's something else you might have done.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠K and wins the first trick. West wins a second trick with the ♠Q. West switches to the ♣A, winning a third trick. West continues with the ♣Q. Finally, you get to win a trick with dummy's ♣K.

You are ready to draw trumps. However, do you have any reason not to simply follow the basic guideline of playing the ♥A and ♥K?

Yes! You "know" West has at most one heart!

From the auction, you determined that West started with at least five diamonds and five clubs. West has also played spades twice. So that leaves room for at most one heart in West's hand.

If West has at most one heart, how should you plan to play the heart suit?

Start with dummy's ♥K!

First, this will help to avoid losing two heart tricks if East started with all four of the missing hearts, the ♥Q-10-8-6. Second, it won't hurt if West has a singleton ♥Q. You can simply draw trumps. And then there's a third possibility... When you play the ♥K, East follows with a low heart, you follow with a low heart, and West follows with... the ♥10. How does that help?

Since you "know" West's ♥10 is a singleton, you can now lead dummy's ♥J. You could also lead a low heart, but the ♥J is more tempting if East wants to cover an honor with an honor. East, however, follows with a low heart and you... play a low heart, "knowing" the finesse is going to work. Just as you expected, West shows out, discarding a diamond. You draw East's remaining trump. That takes care of the potential trump loser.

Since you now have only one trump left in dummy and two spade losers, you need to establish dummy's ♦J as a winner before ruffing a spade in dummy. You lead the ♦K, driving out West's ♦A and promoting both your ♦Q and dummy's ♦J into winners.

West leads the ♣J, which you ruff. You play the ♦Q to get it out of the way - unblock. Now it's time to ruff a spade in dummy. The remaining spade loser gets discarded on dummy's ♦J.

Your trump wins the last trick, making the 3♥ contract. You lost two spades, a diamond, and a club, but no heart tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 93<br>♥ KJ54<br>♦ J543<br>♣ KT5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ<br>♥ T<br>♦ AT986<br>♣ AQJ86</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AT875<br>♥ Q86<br>♦ 72<br>♣ 972</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J642<br>♥ A9732<br>♦ KQ<br>♣ 43</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As declarer, always start playing detective as soon as the opening lead is made and dummy comes down. You want to gather as many clues as possible and as soon as you can so you know what additional clues you should be looking for.

On this deal, you can place eleven of West's cards immediately. The auction has indicated West holds at least five diamonds and five clubs. The opening lead shows West also has a spade. West's continuation of a second spade at trick two increases your knowledge of West's distribution. You now know twelve of West's cards and that West has at most one heart. The question then becomes: What can you do with this knowledge?

To make this contract, you need West to have either the singleton ♥Q or
singleton ♥10. That determines how you need to play the heart suit, starting with the ♥K, not the ♥A.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/03)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/03#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.