---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-05'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/05'

next: false
---

# 2025-01-06

In this deal, what's the best way to handle the trump suit?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ5<br>♥ QJ42<br>♦ KJ83<br>♣ A6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. Neither side is vulnerable. You are the dealer and have the opportunity to select an opening call.

There are 16 high-card points and the hand is balanced. That falls in the middle of the range for opening the bidding 1NT when the partnership agreement is 15-17 points.

West passes. North responds 2♣, the Stayman convention, and East passes. It is time to choose a rebid.

Partner's 2♣ is asking whether you have a four-card or longer major suit. You show the four-card heart suit.

West passes. North jumps to 4♥, and East passes. The auction is back around to you.

Partner has decided How High and Where the partnership belongs based on your description of the hand: game in hearts. You have no reason to do anything other than pass.

West passes, and the auction has ended. You are now the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣J. Dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 863<br>♥ AT65<br>♦ AQ94<br>♣ Q7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQ5<br>♥ QJ42<br>♦ KJ83<br>♣ A6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 12 high-card points and, with four-card heart support, can add 1 dummy point for the doubleton club.

In 4♥ you can afford only three losers. In a trump contract, begin by counting the potential losers. In the heart suit there is a potential loser since you are missing the ♥K. There could be a second loser if the five missing hearts divide 5-0, although that's unlikely. There are two potential spade losers since the opponents hold both the ♠A and ♠J. There are no diamond losers since you hold all the top cards in the suit. There is a potential club loser since the opponents hold the ♣K. Assuming the missing hearts don't divide 5-0, there is one heart loser, two spade losers, and one club loser. That's four losers so you will need to eliminate at least one to make the contract.

You can avoid the heart loser with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♥K. That's a 50% chance. Similarly, you may be able to avoid the second spade loser with the help of a repeated finesse if East holds the ♠A. That's another 50% chance. You can plan to lead twice from dummy toward your ♠Q and ♠K.

There's not much you can do about the club loser in the suit itself. However, West has led the ♣J. If West has led from an interior sequence headed by the ♣K-J, you can win dummy's ♣Q at trick one. That's at least worth a try.

So the contract basically appears to hinge on either the heart finesse working or the spade finesse working. Combining two 50% chances gives you a 75% chance of success. Will that be good enough on this deal?

Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣J. You try the ♣Q from dummy as your only real hope to avoid a club loser. East, however, produces the ♣K. So much for that chance. With no reason to hold up, you win the ♣A.

The priority is to draw the defenders' trumps, hoping West holds the ♥K. Suppose you lead the ♥Q. West plays the ♥K. That looks like good news. The finesse has worked. You win dummy's ♥A as East follows with a low heart. You play a second round of hearts winning the ♥J. Oops. Bad news. West shows out on this round, discarding a low diamond. East started with four hearts and now has a heart winner.

You can't afford to draw another round of trumps. If East then gains the lead and plays a fourth round of trumps, the defenders can take all their club winners. Time to try the spade finesse, hoping East holds the ♠A. You cross to dummy with a diamond. You lead a spade from dummy and, when East follows with a low spade, you try the ♠Q. More bad news. West wins the ♠A. You can't avoid losing two spade tricks.

West takes a club winner. West can't lead another club since you still have trumps left in both hands. West leads a spade and East's ♠J drives out your ♠K.

You can now afford to draw a third round of trumps, leaving East with the remaining high trump. You start taking the remaining diamond winners. Both defenders follow to the second round of diamonds. When you play another diamond winner, East ruffs with the heart winner.

The defenders take their second spade trick.

You have the last two tricks but the contract has gone down one. Even though the heart finesse worked, the hearts split badly and the was badly placed.

Could you have overcome these problems?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣J. You try the ♣Q but East plays the ♣K. So much for your first chance. With no reason to hold up, you win the ♣A.

You want to draw trumps and you are hoping West holds the ♥K. There will be no problem if the defenders' hearts divide 3-2 and there will be nothing you can do to avoid a heart loser if West holds four hearts including the ♥K. But what if West holds a singleton ♥K? Can you guard against that?

Yes!

Start by leading a low heart!

If West follows with a low heart, you can finesse dummy's ♥10. If this wins, you can cross back to your hand and lead the ♥Q to trap West's ♥K if West started with two or three hearts including the ♥K.

When you lead a low heart, West's ♥K appears. It looks as though West did indeed start with only a singleton heart. You win the ♥A as East follows with a low heart. You draw a second round of trumps with dummy's ♥10. West does show out, discarding a diamond. So East has two hearts remaining and you have avoided a heart loser. With only two potential spade losers and one club loser remaining, the contract is now assured.

However, some care must still be taken. If you draw both of East's remaining hearts, you will have no hearts remaining. Then, when you lose a trick to the ♠A, the defenders can take all their established club winners. So, before drawing both the remaining trumps, you lead a spade. You are hoping East holds the ♠A so you will lose only one spade trick and finish with an overtrick. However, East follows with a low spade and, when you play the ♠Q, West wins the ♠A. So much for an overtrick.

West takes the defenders' established club winner. Since you kept some trumps in dummy, West can't effectively lead another club since you would ruff in dummy and sluff - discard - your spade loser. Instead, West leads a diamond, which you win.

It's now okay to draw East's remaining hearts. The ♥Q removes one of East's hearts. The ♥J removes East's last heart. Now it's safe to take the remaining diamond winners. The promoted spade winner is your tenth trick.

The defenders have the last trick, but you have made the contract. You lost two spade tricks and one club trick, but no heart tricks.

## The Rest of the Story

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 863<br>♥ AT65<br>♦ AQ94<br>♣ Q7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT42<br>♥ K<br>♦ 752<br>♣ JT954</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J97<br>♥ 9873<br>♦ T6<br>♣ K832</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQ5<br>♥ QJ42<br>♦ KJ83<br>♣ A6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

How you handle a given suit combination depends on how many tricks you need from the suit or how many tricks you can afford to lose.

On this deal, you can't afford to lose a heart trick if you have two spade losers and a club loser. To avoid a heart loser, you need West to hold the ♥K, but you need more than that. If West holds the ♥K, there will be no problem if the defenders' hearts are divided 3-2. There's no way to avoid a heart loser if West holds four hearts or the hearts divide 5-0. So the focus is on avoiding a heart loser if West holds the ♥K and East holds four hearts. By starting with a low heart rather than the ♥Q or ♥J, you guard against this layout.

Starting with a low heart doesn't cost anything. If West follows with a low heart, you will finesse the ♥10. If the ♥10 wins, you can cross back to your hand and now lead the ♥Q or ♥J to repeat the finesse. You avoid a heart loser if West started with a singleton, doubleton, or tripleton ♥K.

The best way to handle a particular suit combination depends on your objective.

Here, you can't afford a heart loser, so you want to play the suit in the safest way to avoid losing a trick.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/06)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/04)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/06#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.