---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-06'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/06'

next:
  text: '2025-01-08'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/08'
---

# 2025-01-07

In today's deal, can you get to partner's established winners?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J763<br>♥ T654<br>♦ K5<br>♣ AQ6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. East is the dealer and opens 1♦. You have an opportunity to make a call.

You have support for the three unbid suits, but the hand isn't quite strong enough for a takeout double. You have 10 high-card pints plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton diamond, but that's still less than the opening bid values partner will expect. You pass for now.

West responds 1♠, and your partner, North, passes. Opener now jumps to 3♦, showing a six-card or longer diamond suit and a medium-strength hand of about 17-18 points. You have another chance to make a call.

Having kept out at the one level, you certainly aren't coming in now.

West bids 3NT. Partner and East pass, and the auction is back to you.

Naturally you pass, and 3NT is the contract with partner on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♣4, and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ A4<br>♥ AJ7<br>♦ AQJ984<br>♣ 72</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J763<br>♥ T654<br>♦ K5<br>♣ AQ6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Dummy has the expected hand with 16 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card diamond suit. The jump to 3♦ invites game and shows a good long suit.

The ♣2 is played from dummy. You are immediately faced with a critical decision. What are you playing to the first trick?

The guideline in this situation is third hand high, doing the best to win the trick for your side. If partner has a five-card club suit headed by the ♣K, you will be able to take the first five tricks and defeat the contract right away.

So let's see what will happen on this deal if you win the first trick with the ♣A. You win the first trick with the ♣A as declarer follows with the ♣5. What are you leading next?

There's definitely no reason to do anything except continue with another club, hoping to take the first five club tricks if partner holds the ♣K or to drive out the ♣K if declarer holds it and promote partner's remaining clubs into winners. When returning partner's suit, it is standard practice to play back the higher card from a remaining doubleton. You don't want to block the suit so you want to play the high card from the short side first. So you continue with the ♣Q. This wins the trick as declarer follows with the ♣10 and partner with the ♣3. Since partner led the ♣4 and then played the ♣3, it looks as though partner started with a five-card club suit. You continue with your last club and declarer wins this with the ♣K. Declarer has been holding up the club winner. It's too bad declarer had the ♣K and not partner, but at least partner's remaining clubs have now been established as winners.

Declarer leads the ♦10, and partner and dummy both play low diamonds. What are you playing to this trick?

If you don't take the ♦K, you might not get it, and there's no reason to hold up since declarer has lots of entries to dummy. So you win this trick. What do you do next?

You want to find an entry to partner's hand since partner has the established winners. Dummy has both major suit aces, so you will need partner to have a good holding in one of the suits. Since dummy started with only two spades but three hearts, including the ♥J, it looks best to try a spade.

Suppose you lead a spade. Declarer wins the trick with dummy's ♠A. Declarer now claims the rest of the tricks. It didn't matter whether you led back a heart or a spade. Declarer gets two spades, two hearts, a club, and five diamonds, making an overtrick.

With declarer holding the ♣K, was there anything you could have done?

Let's go back to the first trick.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♣4, and a low club is played from dummy.

Before automatically playing to the first trick, you need to consider the likely layout of the unseen hands.

How much strength can you expect partner to hold?

Dummy has 16 high-card points and you have 10. West showed 6 or more points with the 1♠ response, but the 3NT bid covers a wide range. However, 3♦ was only invitational, so West presumably has more than a bare minimum, about 8-10 points, for example. That would leave partner with about 4-6 points.

What is the likely layout of the club suit?

Partner has presumably led fourth best from the longest and strongest suit. The ♣2 is in dummy, but the ♣3 is missing, so partner could be leading from a five-card suit. You can apply the Rule of Eleven to partner's lead. Subtracting the card led, the 4, from 11 leaves 7 cards higher than the ♣4 in the other three hands. Dummy has one higher card and you have three. That leaves declarer with three cards higher than the ♣4. Does that tell you whether partner or declarer holds the ♣K or ♣J?

No. Partner might have led from a five-card suit headed by the ♣K, or the ♣J, or even just the ♣10. If declarer has three clubs including both the ♣K and ♣J, there's unlikely to be any way to defeat the contract. So you need to hope partner holds either the ♣K or ♣J.

If partner holds the ♣K, will it make any difference whether you play the ♣A or the ♣Q to the first trick?

No.

If partner holds the ♣K, the ♣Q will win the first trick. You can then continue with the ♣A and a third club to partner's ♣K.

If declarer holds the will it make any difference whether you play the ♣A or ♣Q to the first trick?

Not really.

Declarer is always entitled to a trick with the ♣K. The only possible problem is that you might confuse partner who will think declarer holds both the ♣A and ♣K. However, that shouldn't matter on this deal since it is likely you who will be getting the lead next with the ♦K and you will then be able to clarify the situation.

Is there any potential advantage to playing the ♣Q at trick one rather than the ♣A?

Yes!

It won't matter if partner holds the ♣K since you will merely continue the suit. If declarer holds the ♣K, however, it will make it very difficult for declarer to hold up winning the first trick with the ♣K. Declarer won't know that you hold the ♣A, and will be afraid of not getting a trick with the ♣K if it isn't taken immediately.

So let's see what will happen on the actual deal if you play the ♣Q at trick one rather than the ♣A. When you play the ♣Q, declarer wins the ♣K. It's too bad declarer has that card rather than partner, but at least you have driven it out. Hopefully, partner holds the ♣J and your side's club winners are now established.

Declarer doesn't have enough tricks without establishing the diamond suit. Declarer leads the ♦10 and, when partner plays low, tries the diamond finesse, playing low and hoping your partner holds the ♦K. Unfortunately for declarer, and fortunately for your side, you win the trick with the ♦K.

Now you can surprise both partner and declarer by playing the ♣A. Partner's play of the ♣3 on this trick confirms that partner started with a five-card suit. You lead your last club and are pleased to see that partner holds the ♣J and can top declarer's ♣10.

The lead is now with partner, and partner can take two more club tricks. 3NT is down one. Your side got a diamond and four club tricks.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QT8<br>♥ Q98<br>♦ 32<br>♣ J9843</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K952<br>♥ K32<br>♦ T76<br>♣ KT5</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ A4<br>♥ AJ7<br>♦ AQJ984<br>♣ 72</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J763<br>♥ T654<br>♦ K5<br>♣ AQ6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If you win the first trick with the ♣A and continue with the ♣Q, declarer won't have any trouble holding up the ♣K. Now, there will be no entry to partner's established club winners. When you play the ♣Q at trick one, look at the problem this gives declarer. If declarer were to hold up and your partner held the ♣A-J, you would return a club and declarer wouldn't get any club tricks. So declarer naturally wins the ♣K and hopes that either the diamond finesse will work or that the defenders' clubs are divided 4-4 and they have only three club tricks to take.

Creating an entry to the partnership's long suit is the key to making this somewhat unusual defensive play. If it seemed that partner was the defender with an entry in one of the side suits, then you might make the more typical play of the ♣A at trick one.

Here, you can see that only you can win a diamond trick for the defense and partner is unlikely to have an entry outside the club suit itself. So it is up to you to create an entry to partner's hand if it is declarer who holds the ♣K. And it costs nothing to play the ♣Q rather than the ♣A in this situation.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/07)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/31)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/11)

### By Date

Use the links below.