---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-08'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/08'

next: false
---

# 2025-01-09

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT<br>♥ QT9<br>♦ A932<br>♣ AQ83</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make in first position.

You have a balanced hand with 16 high-card points. That's ideal for a 1NT opening when the partnership range is 15-17 points.

West makes a jump overcall of 3♠. It is essentially a preemptive jump overcall, but West will have a reasonable hand since East and West are vulnerable. Partner, North, bids 3NT, and East passes. The auction is back to you.

You have nothing more to say. Partner decided to put the partnership in game in notrump despite West's 3♠ overcall.

West passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠K. Partner puts down the dummy, and you have to find a way to take the nine tricks needed to make the contract.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 76<br>♥ KJ8<br>♦ KJ54<br>♣ KJ52</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AT<br>♥ QT9<br>♦ A932<br>♣ AQ83</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 12 high-card points but no spade stopper. It's a good thing you have one! Partner assumed it is unlikely West has six or seven spades headed by the ♠A-K-Q. West might have chosen to pass and defend with solid spades.

As declarer, you start your plan by counting the number of winners you have. There is one sure spade trick, the ♠A. There are no sure heart tricks since the opponents hold the ♥A. There are four sure club tricks, the ♣A, ♣K, ♣Q, and ♣J. There are also two diamond winners, the ♦A and ♦K. You start with seven tricks: a spade, four clubs, and two diamonds. You need to develop two more to make 3NT.

You aren't getting any more tricks from spades or clubs.

You can promote two heart tricks by driving out the ♥A.

The diamond suit could also provide two extra winners if the ♦Q is favorably placed and the five missing diamonds divide favorably.

The hearts provide a sure way to develop the two extra tricks needed. The diamonds require a favorable lie of the missing diamonds. Is there a reason not to go with the hearts?

Perhaps. West has shown a six- or seven-card spade suit and will drive out the ♠A. If West holds the ♥A, West will win and take all the defenders' established spade winners. If East holds the ♥A, you'll be okay if West started with a seven-card spade suit. You can hold up once to run East out of spades. Since you can't be certain which defender holds the ♥A, what should your plan？

You first want to try getting the two extra tricks from the diamond suit. If that doesn't work, you can then play hearts and hope East holds the ♥A and no more spades.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠K. You play low from dummy, and East plays the ♠2. You hold up winning the ♠A. If West started with a seven-card spade suit, you want to run East out of spades. West continues with the ♠Q and, this time, you have no choice but to win the ♠A as East follows with the ♠3. Hopefully, East started with only two spades and you have turned East into a safe opponent. What next?

There's no harm in taking the four club winners. Maybe the defenders will give you some help with their discards. You play the ♣A and both defenders follow with low clubs. When you lead a club to dummy's ♣K, West shows out, discarding the ♥4. When you continue with dummy's ♣J, West discards the ♥2. West's high-low with the ♥4-2 appears to be an encouraging attitude signal. Combined with West's choice of leading the at trick two, West's highest remaining spade, it looks as though West holds the ♥A. You take your last club winner. East follows with the defenders' last club and West discards another heart. What's next?

You are at the critical point in the play. It's time to tackle the diamond suit, hoping West has the ♦Q. If that doesn't work, you'll have to hope East has the ♥A and no more spades. What are you playing at this point?

Typically, when you have to play a suit like the diamonds, you start by playing the ♦A, just in case East started with a singleton ♦Q. Let's see what will happen on this deal if that's what you do.

Suppose you start diamonds by playing the ♦A. The ♦Q falls on this trick, but it is from West, not East. That's good news and bad news. You have an extra trick with dummy's ♦J. You can take a trick with the ♦K, but that's only eight tricks. Your last diamond isn't a winner since East still has the ♦10. You are going to have to hope East holds the ♥A. You lead a heart but, as you feared, West wins the ♥A.

West now takes three established spade winners. The 3NT contract is down one. You took a spade, four clubs, and three diamonds, but that's all.

With West holding the ♥A and the diamond suit dividing 4-1, was there
anything you could have done?

Let's go back and take another look.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♠K, and you hold up winning the first trick. West continues with the ♠Q, and you have to win the ♠A. You take your four club winners. West discards the ♥4, then the ♥2, and the ♥3 on the second, third, and fourth rounds of clubs.

It's time to tackle the diamond suit. Although you might normally start by playing the ♦A in this situation, there's nothing to be gained on this deal. East can't have a singleton ♦Q! That would mean West started with four diamonds, but West has already shown up with at least six spades, three hearts, and a club. Also, if West did have the ♦10-8-7-6, you couldn't get four diamond tricks anyway.

So you should start with a low diamond!

If West follows with a low diamond, you plan to finesse dummy's ♦J. That will give you four diamond tricks if West started with a doubleton ♦Q or a tripleton ♦Q. On the actual deal, the ♦Q appears from West. That is good news! You win dummy's ♦K. You take a trick with dummy's ♦J. West shows out on this trick. You lead a diamond from dummy and, when East follows with a low diamond, you take a finesse against the ♦10 by playing the ♦9. This wins, as West discards another spade. The ♦A is your ninth trick.

When you lead a heart, West wins the ♥A and takes the established spade winners, but you've already made the 3NT contract. You took one spade, four clubs, and four diamonds.

## Summary

Here is the complete layout.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 76<br>♥ KJ8<br>♦ KJ54<br>♣ KJ52</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQJ9854<br>♥ A432<br>♦ Q<br>♣ 7</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 32<br>♥ 765<br>♦ T876<br>♣ T964</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AT<br>♥ QT9<br>♦ A932<br>♣ AQ83</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Although you have 28 combined high-card points and the opponents have only 12, West can actually take eight tricks in a spade contract. That shows the trick-taking power of distribution. How you play a suit combination - the diamonds in this case - can vary depending on what you know about the opponents' distribution.

On this deal, you can determine that East can't possibly hold a singleton diamond, so there's no advantage to starting with the ♦A. Starting with a low diamond lets you take four diamond tricks if West started with two or three diamonds including the ♦Q... or a singleton ♦Q.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/09)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/06)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/09#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.