---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-09'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/09'

next: false
---

# 2025-01-10

On this deal, is the straight 50% finesse your best option?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ6<br>♥ 7<br>♦ AKQ<br>♣ KQJT87</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. You have to decide what call to make with this hand in first position.

You have 21 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card club suit. That's too strong to open 1♣, which partner might pass. Instead, you have enough to open with a strong artificial 2♣ bid.

West passes, and partner, North, responds with an artificial waiting bid of 2♦. East passes, and you have to decide what rebid to make.

The 2♣ opening was artificial, so now you have to show partner the strong club suit. Having opened 2♣, the 3♣ rebid is forcing.

West passes, and partner raises to 4♣. That shows a club fit and some values. With a very weak hand, partner could bid 3♦, cheaper minor negative. East passes, and you have to decide what to do next.

With partner showing some values, slam is a distinct possibility provided the partnership is not missing two aces. You could make a control-showing bid of 4♦ to see what partner says, but it is simpler to go right to the Blackwood convention. Let's go with that.

West passes, and partner replies 5♥, showing two aces whether the partnership is using standard Blackwood or key-card Blackwood. East passes, and you have another decision to make.

Since the partnership has all the aces and partner's strength is unlimited, there may be a grand slam. It can't do any harm to ask about kings. If partner has one, there will be at least twelve tricks; if partner has two, there will definitely be thirteen tricks. So let's go with 5NT.

West passes, and partner replies 6♣, showing no kings. East passes, and you have to decide what call to make next.

With partner holding no kings, a grand slam is out. You can simply settle for a small slam by passing.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 6♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>5♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>5NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>6♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥K, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 742<br>♥ AJ5<br>♦ 976<br>♣ A643</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ6<br>♥ 7<br>♦ AKQ<br>♣ KQJT87</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You must now find a way to take twelve tricks.

How many losers do you have in 6♣?

You don't have any club, diamond, or heart losers. However, there are two potential spade losers.

There are no extra winners in dummy on which to discard either of the spade losers. You have, however, the possibility for avoiding a spade loser with the help of a finesse, hoping East holds the ♠K. That's a straight 50% chance.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West leads the ♥K, and you win the trick with dummy's ♥A. What should you do at trick two?

Since you're hoping the spade finesse will work, all you need is to be able to lead a spade from dummy toward your ♠Q. That can wait until after you have drawn all the opponents' trumps. So suppose you decide to draw trumps, winning with one of your high clubs. Both defenders follow suit. You draw the remaining trump with dummy's ♣A as West follows suit and East discards a low heart. You make use of your entry now to try the spade finesse. You lead a low spade, East plays the ♠J, and you play the ♠Q. Unfortunately, it loses to West's ♠K.

West leads the ♥Q, hoping to take another trick. You don't have any more hearts and can ruff the trick. Dummy's ♥J is now a winner. However, there's bad news. You have no entry to dummy to take the ♥J and discard the spade loser in your hand.

You can take your three diamond winners and the but, eventually, you will have to give up a spade trick. 6♣ is down one, losing two spades.

Could you have overcome the unfavorable layout of the spade suit and make your slam?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♥K. Since you have only a singleton heart, after winning with dummy's ♥A, you won't have any more losers in the suit. So at first glance, it looks as though West's lead doesn't hurt you. More importantly, however, let's see how it can actually help you on this deal.

Which defender holds the ♥Q?

West.

West has led the ♥K, presumably from the top of touching honors.

How might you take advantage of this knowledge?

You may be able to put West on lead with the ♥Q and make West lead a spade. If a spade is led by West - right into your ♠A-Q - you will be guaranteed two spade tricks.

How can you put West on lead?

You could lead dummy's ♥J and discard a spade loser.

West would have to win with the ♥Q.

If you do put West on lead with the ♥Q, how can you make West lead a spade?

You must remove all of West's other options. You draw any clubs West has. Next, you eliminate all the diamonds in your combined hands so that if West has a diamond left to lead, it will give you a ruff and a sluff. You can ruff in dummy and sluff - discard - a spade loser from your hand.

How can you prevent West from leading another heart after winning the ♥Q?

You will need to eliminate dummy's third heart before putting West on lead. Then, if West leads a heart, it will again give you a ruff and a sluff, allowing you to ruff in dummy and sluff a spade loser from your hand.

So forcing West to lead a spade is a much better plan than trying the spade finesse. Are there any potential problems with this plan?

There aren't a lot of entries to the dummy. After the ♥A is driven out, dummy's only remaining entry will be the ♣A. You need to eliminate dummy's third heart and get back to dummy to lead the ♥J.

Let's see how the play should go.

You win the first trick with dummy's ♥A. Right away, you are at a critical point in the play. What should you do at trick two?

You should ruff dummy's low heart!

You need to eliminate the heart and there is only one entry left, so you better make use of this opportunity.

You now draw the defenders' trumps. Both defenders follow suit when you play a high club. There is still one club outstanding. You draw the defenders' last trump. You now have another key play to make. What are you doing next?

You need to eliminate the diamonds from both hands. You take a trick with the ♦A. You take another trick with the ♦K. You take the last diamond winner. That eliminates the diamonds in both your hands. What next?

It's time to put West on lead. You can get to dummy with the ♣A. You lead dummy's ♥J. East follows with a low heart. You have another critical play. What are you playing to this trick from your hand?

You discard a low spade. You are losing this trick to West's ♥Q. At the same time, you are discarding one of your losers. A loser on a loser.

Here are the remaining cards.



West is on lead and has little choice but to lead a spade. If West leads any other suit, you can ruff in dummy and discard the ♠Q. When West leads a spade, you win the trick with the ♠Q.

The rest of the tricks are yours. You have made the 6♣ contract, losing only one heart.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 742<br>♥ AJ5<br>♦ 976<br>♣ A643</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K85<br>♥ KQT94<br>♦ T54<br>♣ 92</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ JT93<br>♥ 8632<br>♦ J832<br>♣ 5</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ6<br>♥ 7<br>♦ AKQ<br>♣ KQJT87</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With West holding the ♠K, you would go down if you try the spade finesse. After the finesse loses, you would still have a spade to lose.

The technique used to make the slam is an end play. You put West on lead near the end of the play with no option but to make a lead favorable to you. To do that, you had to eliminate West's other options. With a shortage of entries to dummy, you had to eliminate dummy's low heart at trick two. You also needed an exit card to put West on lead at the appropriate time. West's opening lead of the ♥K gave you the clue you needed. You could eventually put West on lead by playing the ♥J and letting West win the ♥Q.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/10)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/09)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/10#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.