---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/12'

next: false
---

# 2025-01-13

In today's contract, how can you avoid the possible danger?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ95<br>♥ K7<br>♦ AT4<br>♣ A75</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. You are the dealer and have to decide what call to make in first position.

There are 18 high-card points and you can add 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. Although the hand is balanced, it is too strong to open 1NT and not strong enough to open 2NT. You can start by opening the five-card major suit, 1♠.

West overcalls 2♥. Partner raises to 2♠, showing at least three-card spade support and about 6-9 or 10 points. East now advances to 4♥. You have to decide what to do after this development.

The ♥K doesn't look so valuable any more, but you have found an eight-card or longer major-suit fit and you do have enough strength to make game a reasonable possibility. Any penalty for doubling 4♥ will likely be less than the vulnerable bonus for game. Let's suppose you continue to 4♠.

After you bid 4♠, everyone passes. That ends the auction and you are the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣K. Partner puts down the dummy with four-card spade support and 6 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for each doubleton.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K864<br>♥ 63<br>♦ K7632<br>♣ 62</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ95<br>♥ K7<br>♦ AT4<br>♣ A75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The first step in 4♠ is to count the potential losers. There are no spade losers since you are missing only four spades and hold the top four spade honors in the combined hands. There are two potential heart losers since the opponents hold all the high hearts other than the ♥A. There will be two club losers remaining in declarer's hand once the ♣A is gone. There will be a diamond loser remaining in declarer's hand after the ♦A and ♦K are gone. That's five losers, two more than you can afford. You need to Browse Declarer's Checklist to see how two losers might be eliminated.

One heart loser might be eliminated with the help of a finesse by leading toward the ♥K, hoping East holds the ♥A. That would normally be a 50% chance but West overcalled hearts at the two level, making it more likely West holds the ♥A. Still, East did raise hearts to the four level.

One club loser can be avoided by ruffing the third round of clubs in dummy after a club trick has been lost.

The diamond loser might be avoided if either defender started with a
doubleton ♦Q-J. It might also be avoided if West started with a singleton ♦Q or ♦J by winning dummy's ♦K and then finessing the ♦10. In the more likely case where the five missing diamonds divide 3-2, you might be able to establish two extra winners through length and use them to discard losers in other suits.

In Considering the Order, you will need to keep a trump in dummy with which to ruff the club loser. You will also need to keep an entry to the diamonds if you are going to establish winners in the suit.

Are there any other considerations?

Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West leads the ♣K. A low club is played from dummy, and East plays the ♣J.

Suppose you win the ♣A. There doesn't seem to be any reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. Both defenders follow when the ♠A is played. The defenders' four spades haven't divided 4-0. When the ♠Q is played, West follows but East shows out, discarding a low heart. West started with three spades and still has one left. You can afford to draw West's last trump. You still have a spade left in dummy to ruff a club loser and as an entry to the diamonds if necessary. East discards another heart.

Time to establish the diamonds so you can discard some of your losers. Both defenders follow when the ♦A is played. No doubleton ♦Q-J. When you play another diamond, West plays the ♦Q. You win the ♦K as East follows with another diamond. The defenders' diamonds have divided 3-2, so you will be able to establish winners in the suit. You lead a third round of diamonds and East wins the ♦J. Dummy's remaining diamonds are now winners.

East takes the defenders' established club winner. East now leads a heart. You have no choice but to try the ♥K, hoping East holds the ♥A. No luck. West wins the ♥A. West takes another trick with the ♥Q. That's the fourth trick for the defense.

You have the last three tricks, but the contract is down one. The missing diamonds divided 3-2 but the defenders were able to take their winners before you could discard any losers. The ♥A was also unfavorably placed.

Could you have made the contract anyway?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣K. A low club is played from dummy, and East plays the ♣J.

Before automatically winning this trick with the ♣A, you need to consider the situation. Since West overcalled hearts at the two level, it is quite likely West holds the ♥A. If that's the case, East is the dangerous opponent. If East gains the lead, East can lead a heart to trap your ♥K. West is the safe opponent since, if West leads a heart, you will get a trick with the ♥K. East has signalled with ♣J, showing possession of the ♣10. If you win this trick and West later gains the lead, West will be able to put East on play to lead a heart.

So your first step is to hold up winning this trick.

You had to lose a club trick anyway and now you leave West, the safe opponent, on lead. West continues with the ♣Q and now you win the ♣A.

You are in a position to ruff the club loser in dummy, but there's no hurry. You may need to use that as an entry to dummy later. The priority is to draw the defenders' trumps. Both defenders follow to the ♠A. West follows to the but East shows out, discarding a low heart. West started with three spades and East with only one. East's discard of a low heart increases your suspicion West likely holds the ♥A. You draw West's last trump, using dummy's ♣K as East discards another heart. That puts you in dummy with all the trumps drawn.

It's time to go after the diamond suit. You want to keep the ♦K as an entry to dummy once the diamonds are established, so you start by leading a low diamond. East follows with a low diamond. Now what?

You make another avoidance play by playing the ♦10.

You likely have to lose a diamond trick to establish the suit and you want to lose it to West, the safe opponent. You don't expect the ♦10 to win and, indeed, it loses to West's ♦Q. That's okay. The safe opponent is on lead.

These are the remaining cards with West on lead.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 8<br>♥ 63<br>♦ K763<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ AQJ54<br>♦ 8<br>♣ 8</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ T9<br>♦ J9<br>♣ T94</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J9<br>♥ K7<br>♦ A4<br>♣ 7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

What can West do?

If West leads a club or a diamond, you will be able to discard both your heart losers on the diamonds and make an overtrick. West chooses to take the ♥A, hoping East holds the ♥K. That stops you from making an overtrick, but the contract is secure. West continues with another heart and you win the ♥K.

You can ruff the club loser in dummy or discard it on one of the extra diamond winners. You've made the contract, losing only one heart, one club, and one diamond.

## Summary

Here's the full deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K864<br>♥ 63<br>♦ K7632<br>♣ 62</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T32<br>♥ AQJ54<br>♦ Q8<br>♣ KQ8</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ T982<br>♦ J95<br>♣ JT943</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ95<br>♥ K7<br>♦ AT4<br>♣ A75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When making a plan, one of the considerations is the danger represented by the opponents.

On this deal, the auction makes it likely West holds the ♥A. So East is the dangerous opponent and West the safe opponent.

You need to make two avoidance plays. First, you have to let West win the first club trick so West can't put East on lead later in the play when West gains the lead. Second, you have to lose a diamond trick to West, the safe opponent, rather than letting East win the diamond trick. That establishes the extra diamond winners you need without letting the dangerous opponent gain the lead.

You also need to keep a spade entry and a diamond entry to dummy until you are ready to use them.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/3)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/13#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.