---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-13'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/13'

next: false
---

# 2025-01-14

In today's deal, you have a choice of three suits to lead back. Which is the right one?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 87<br>♥ K742<br>♦ KJ7<br>♣ AK82</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make in first position.

You have a balanced hand with 14 high-card points. It's not quite strong enough to open 1NT. With only a four-card heart suit, you open the bidding in the longer minor, clubs.

West overcalls 1♠, and your partner, North, passes. East cuebids 2♣, showing three-card or longer support for spades and at least the values for an invitational raise. You have another chance to make a call.

With partner being silent after West's overcall, you don't have enough to take any further action. With only the ♣A-K, there's no need to make a lead-directing double. If you double, it should show a longer, stronger, club suit. You've already opened 1♣, so partner is likely going to lead that suit anyway.

West bids 2♥, showing a second suit and implying more than a minimum overcall. Partner passes again, and East jumps to 4♠. The auction is back to you.

It sounds as though the opponents have the balance of strength. Nothing to do except pass.

West and partner also pass, ending the auction. Partner will now be on lead against West's 4♠ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♣3 and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q653<br>♥ A3<br>♦ AQT6<br>♣ T74</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 87<br>♥ K742<br>♦ KJ7<br>♣ AK82</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You win the first trick with the ♣K, third hand only as high as necessary. Declarer follows with the ♣6. What now?

Although you might like partner to be on lead to play a diamond or a heart, it would be risky to lead back a low club hoping partner holds the ♣Q. From partner's lead of the ♣3, you know partner has three or four clubs. So declarer has at least two clubs. You want to get a second club trick and hope to get a heart trick and one or more diamond tricks later. You play the ♣A, winning the second trick as declarer follows with the ♣Q. It's a good thing you didn't lead back a low club! Partner and dummy follow with low clubs. What next?

You don't want to lead either a heart or a diamond away from your kings, so it seems safest to continue with another club, hoping to get at least two tricks later in the play. When you lead a club, declarer ruffs with the ♠A. Declarer obviously has solid trumps.

Declarer starts drawing trumps by playing the ♠K. Both you and partner follow with low spades. Declarer continues drawing trumps by playing the ♠J. Both you and partner follow a second time. Declarer started with exactly a five-card spade suit. Declarer then leads the ♦9. When partner follows with the ♦5, declarer plays low from dummy. You win with the ♦J.

You have now reached the critical point in the play. You have three tricks and need one more. What are you playing next?

With no spades remaining, you have three choices:

- A diamond, which would be right into dummy's ♦A-Q.
- A club, which would give declarer a ruff and a sluff, allowing declarer to ruff in one hand and discard a loser from the other hand.
- A heart, which would be leading away from the ♥K.

A heart might look like the best choice. Perhaps partner has something useful in the suit. Let's see what will happen if you lead a heart at this point.

Suppose you lead the ♥2, fourth best. Declarer plays the ♥Q, winning the trick as partner plays the ♥8 and dummy follows with the low heart.

Declarer leads a diamond. You are hoping declarer will try the diamond finesse. However, declarer plays dummy's ♦A. Declarer takes a trick with dummy's ♥A. Next, declarer leads a diamond. You play the ♦K, but declarer ruffs this trick. Declarer started with only two diamonds. Declarer ruffs a heart in dummy. Declarer ruffs dummy's remaining diamond and takes the last trick with dummy's trump.

Declarer has made the 4♠ contract, losing only two clubs and a diamond.

Could the defense have done better?

Let's return to the hand for another look.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♣3 and you win the first trick with the ♣K. You win a second trick with the ♣A. Without anything better to do, you continue with a third round of clubs, and declarer ruffs this trick. Declarer draws two rounds of trumps. All the defenders' trumps are now gone. Declarer then leads the ♦9 and plays a low diamond from dummy, losing to your ♦J. What next?

You must now decide whether to lead a heart, a diamond, or a club. You have seen the danger of returning a heart. If declarer holds the ♥Q, which is likely since West bid hearts during the auction, declarer can win the ♥Q and won't be left with any heart losers. Declarer will still have the ♥A and can ruff any remaining losers in dummy.

How about returning a club?

That's not going to be any good either. Declarer can ruff and sluff - discard - the heart loser from dummy.

However, leading a diamond is right into dummy's ♦A-Q. Won't that help declarer?

No! From the auction and the play so far, you have a count of declarer's distribution. Declarer overcalled 1♠ during the auction, showing a five-card or longer suit. Both you and partner followed with spades when declarer drew trumps, so declarer started with exactly five spades. Declarer ruffed the third round of clubs, so declarer started with exactly two clubs. That leaves declarer with six cards in hearts and diamonds. Since declarer bid hearts during the auction, declarer presumably has four hearts. That leaves declarer with exactly two diamonds. If you lead a diamond and declarer takes three diamond tricks, declarer can only discard two hearts. Declarer will be left with a heart loser. Even if declarer had only three hearts, then declarer would have started with three diamonds. In that case, declarer would have two diamonds left in hand and could discard only one heart. There would still be a heart loser left.

So leading a diamond can never let declarer make the contract!

Let's see. You lead back a diamond and declarer wins with dummy's ♦10. Dummy's ♦A drops your ♦K. Declarer discards one heart on this trick. Dummy's ♦Q takes the next trick. Declarer discards a second heart. However, you "know" declarer still has two hearts remaining. Declarer can take the ♥A and two spade tricks. However, declarer can't prevent you from taking a trick with the ♥K.

You've defeated the 4♠ contract, taking two clubs, a diamond, and one heart.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 42<br>♥ J98<br>♦ 5432<br>♣ J953</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKJT9<br>♥ QT65<br>♦ 98<br>♣ Q6</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q653<br>♥ A3<br>♦ AQT6<br>♣ T74</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 87<br>♥ K742<br>♦ KJ7<br>♣ AK82</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Keeping track of the auction and the cards played is important for good
defense.

On this deal, it gives you an accurate count of declarer's distribution. That allows you to count the number of tricks declarer has and determine that it is safe to lead a diamond right into dummy's strong holding.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/14)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/11)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/14#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.