---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-15'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/15'

next: false
---

# 2025-01-16

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ95<br>♥ K7<br>♦ AT4<br>♣ A75</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

You have 17 high-card points and a balanced hand. That falls into the 15-17 point range for opening 1NT.

West passes, and partner, North, responds 2♣. East passes, and you have to choose a rebid.

Partner's 2♣ bid is the Stayman convention, asking whether you have a four-card or longer major suit. You get to show your heart suit.

West passes, and partner raises to 4♥. East passes, and you have another chance to make a call.

Partner's raise to 4♥ is a signoff bid. Partner has decided Where the partnership belongs, hearts. Partner has also decided How High, game. Since the 1NT opening already described your hand, you have no reason to bid again. You pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠Q. Partner puts down the dummy, and you have to find the best way to take ten tricks to make the contract.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K52<br>♥ A732<br>♦ 9762<br>♣ A4</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T76<br>♥ KJ85<br>♦ AKQJ<br>♣ KT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As declarer, in a suit contract, you start by counting the potential losers you have. Assuming the five missing hearts are divided 3-2, there is only one potential loser since you are missing the ♥Q. If the defenders' hearts divide 4-1 or worse, you could have more than one loser. There are three potential spade losers. You are missing the ♠A, ♠Q and ♠J. There are no diamond losers. You have the four top cards. There are also no club losers since you have both the ♣A and ♣K. That leaves you with four potential losers: a heart and three spades. You need to eliminate one loser.

In hearts, you could plan to try a finesse, taking the ♥A and then leading toward your hand, planning to play the ♥J if East follows with a low heart. Following the guideline of eight ever, nine never, the finesse offers better odds than playing the ♥A-K, hoping the ♥Q falls doubleton.

In spades, you would usually plan to lead toward the ♠K, hoping West holds the ♠A. A 50% chance. However, West has led the ♠Q. Since defenders rarely lead away from an ace against a suit contract, it seems likely East holds the ♠A. Does this mean you'll have to pin your hopes on avoiding a heart loser?

Let's see how the play might develop.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠Q. You are faced with your first critical decision. Should you play dummy's ♠K?

Let's see what will happen if you do.

Suppose you cover an honor with an honor and play dummy's ♠K on West's ♠Q. As you expected, East wins the trick with the ♠A. East returns the ♠9. There's not much point playing the ♠10 since you "know" West holds the ♠J. West's lead of the shows the unless West was leading a singleton or a doubleton, in which case East would have continued with the ♠J. You play low, hoping perhaps West started with a doubleton ♠Q-J, but West follows with a low spade. East continues with another spade, and your ♠10 falls to West's ♠J. You've lost the first three tricks. Now everything depends on avoiding a heart loser.

Could you have improved things by not playing the ♠K at trick one?

Let's see.

## Another Possible Play

West leads the ♠Q. Since you "know" East holds the there's not much point in playing dummy's ♠K. Perhaps East started with a singleton or doubleton ♠A. Let's see the difference it makes if you play a low spade.

You play a low spade from dummy, East plays the ♠9, and you follow with a low spade. West's wins the first trick. East didn't start with a singleton ♠A. West now switches to a low club.

Why didn't West continue with another spade?

West presumably still has the ♠J and East the ♠A.

By playing a low spade from dummy, you "froze" the suit.

If West continues with the ♠J, you could then cover with the ♠K. East would win the ♠A, but your ♠10 would be promoted into a winner. If West were to lead a low spade instead of the ♠J, you could play low from dummy. East would have to win the ♠A to prevent you from winning with the ♠10. Dummy's ♠K would then have become a winner.

Of course, the spade suit is not only frozen for the opponents. It is also frozen for you. If you were to lead the ♠10, West would cover with the ♠J, and you'd lose two tricks whether or not you play dummy's ♠K - unless East started with a doubleton ♠A.

You play a low club from dummy, East plays the ♣Q, and you win the ♣K. You've stopped the opponents from taking the first three tricks, but now what?

As you've already determined, you don't want to have to play a spade yourself since the suit is frozen. You also don't want to start taking your diamond winners because a defender may ruff with a low trump. So it looks as though it is time to start drawing the defenders' trumps. You play a low heart to dummy's ♥A. Both defenders follow with low hearts. No singleton ♥Q, but at least the defenders' hearts haven't divided 5-0. You continue with a low heart, and East follows with another low heart. You have another critical decision to make. Should you finesse the ♥J or play the ♥K?

Play the ♥K!

Although the best chance to avoid a heart loser is to play the ♥J - eight "ever" - that's not the best play for making the contract. If the finesse were to lose to the ♥Q, West would lead a club or a diamond, and you would be left to play the frozen spade suit yourself, likely losing two more spade tricks. You want to force the opponents to lead the frozen suit.

When you play the ♥K, West follows with the ♥10. No ♥Q, but at least the defenders' hearts have divided 3-2. Now one defender has the ♥Q remaining. Should you put that opponent on lead right now?

No!

If you give up the heart trick right now, whoever wins can lead a club or a diamond. Then you'll be left to play the spade suit.

You first want to eliminate the clubs in your combined hands and the diamonds in the defender's hand that is holding the ♥Q so that, on winning the ♥Q, the defender will have no choice but to lead a spade. However, you have another decision to make. Should you start by taking the remaining club winner or the diamond winners?

Clubs!

But let's see the problem if you were to start with the diamonds.

Suppose you play the ♦A. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. You continue with the ♦K. Again, both defenders follow with low diamonds. When you play the ♦Q, however, West ruffs with the ♥Q. That's okay. You were planning to lose a trick to the ♥Q anyway. Now, perhaps, West will lead a spade.

West, however, leads a club, and you have to win the ♣A. Now you're back on lead and will have to play the spade suit yourself. That wasn't the idea.

So let's step back and look at the play again.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♠Q, winning the first trick as you play low from dummy and East encourages with the ♠9. You were hoping West would continue leading spades, which would promote your ♠10 to become a winner. West, however, switches to the ♣3. You win the trick with the ♣K. But the spade suit has become a frozen suit. You don't want to have to play a spade yourself since whichever side leads it again will lose a trick. So let's see how you can get the opponents to help you out. You draw the defenders' trumps. Both defenders follow suit as you win with dummy's ♥A. You continue with a low heart and correctly win with the ♥K in your hand. Both defenders follow again, but the ♥Q is still outstanding. You now have to decide the order in which you start taking your winners.

As you've seen, if you were to start with the diamond suit, the defender with the ♥Q could ruff one of your diamond winners and then lead a club. You would then be left to play the spade suit yourself, guaranteeing that you would lose two more spade tricks. Instead, it is usually best to start with the shorter suit. It's less likely that a defender can ruff before you are ready.

So you play a club to dummy's ♣A and, as you expected, both defenders follow suit. With clubs eliminated in both your hands, you can now start taking the diamond winners. Both defenders follow with low diamonds on the first round of the suit. Both defenders also follow suit on the second round of diamonds. When you lead a third round of diamonds, West chooses to ruff with the ♥Q. It wouldn't do West any good to refuse to ruff a diamond. You could eventually lead a heart to put West on lead anyway.

West chooses to lead the ♠J. This time, you do cover with the ♠K, and East wins the ♠A. Now your ♠10 has been promoted to a winner.

You have the rest of the tricks. You lost a heart trick but only two spade tricks.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K52<br>♥ A732<br>♦ 9762<br>♣ A4</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJ4<br>♥ QT4<br>♦ T8<br>♣ J9532</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ A983<br>♥ 96<br>♦ 543<br>♣ Q876</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T76<br>♥ KJ85<br>♦ AKQJ<br>♣ KT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As you can see, once West leads the and you play a low spade from dummy, the suit becomes frozen. Whichever side leads the suit next loses one of its potential winners.

On this deal, you want the defenders to be forced to break open the frozen suit and the opponents want the opposite. As long as the defenders' hearts are divided 3-2 - a 67% chance - you can force the defenders to lead a spade. That's better than a 50% finesse.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/16)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/13)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/16#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.