---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-16'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/16'

next: false
---

# 2025-01-17

On this deal, how do you plan to take the finesse?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJT974<br>♥ 8<br>♦ 985<br>♣ KQ6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. East is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♥. What call are you going to make with the South hand?

You have 10 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit. That's more than enough for a simple overcall of 1♠.

West raises to 2♥. Your partner, North, advances to 3♥, showing support for spades and game-invitational values. East then bids 4♥. After all these developments, the auction is back to you.

Although you might pass, leaving any further decision to partner, you do have a much better hand than you might have for a one-level overcall. With a six-card spade suit and nothing wasted in hearts, it looks reasonable to continue to 4♠. It might make if partner has suitable values. It might be a good sacrifice bid if the opponents can make 4♥. So let's go with 4♠. Besides, it puts pressure back on the opponents to decide what to do next.

Everyone passes. You are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥2, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K85<br>♥ 97<br>♦ KJ6<br>♣ AJ975</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJT974<br>♥ 8<br>♦ 985<br>♣ KQ6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner certainly has some useful values, and it's not clear whether you could defeat 4♥.

In 4♠, you start by considering the potential losers. How many do you have?

There is a potential spade loser since you are missing the ♠Q. There is a sure heart loser which you are going to lose right away since West has led a heart. There are no club losers, but you have three potential diamond losers since you are missing the ♦A, ♦Q, and ♦10. So that's five potential losers: a spade, a heart, and three diamonds. You need to avoid two of them if you are to make the contract.

In spades, you have nine combined cards missing the ♠Q. The guideline is eight ever, nine never, suggesting playing the ♠A and ♠K, hoping the ♠Q will fall singleton or doubleton. However, you also have a possible two-way finesse. If you think West is more likely to hold the ♠Q, you could take a finesse against West. If you think East is more likely to hold the ♠Q, you could play the ♠K and then take a finesse against East if the ♠Q hasn't appeared.

The diamond suit offers various finessing possibilities. You can lead the ♦9 and, if West plays low, choose among:
- Playing low from dummy—finessing against the ♦10,
- Playing the ♦J—finessing against the ♦Q, or
- Playing the ♦K—finessing against the ♦A.

A much better plan is to discard two diamonds on dummy's extra club winners after trumps have been drawn. Then you won't have to guess what to do in diamonds. You'll be left with only one diamond loser.

Are there any potential problems?

The only danger is if West can gain the lead before you have an opportunity to discard the diamond losers on the clubs. West can lead a diamond and, if East holds the ♦A-Q, you will lose two diamond tricks. Is it likely East holds both the ♦A and ♦Q?

Yes. East opened the bidding and continued to game after West raised to only the two level. East is likely to hold most of the outstanding high cards. Even if you have to lose two diamond tricks in addition to the heart loser, that will be okay, provided you don't lose a trick to the ♠Q as well.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥2. You play low from dummy, and East wins the first trick with the ♥A. What information does that give you about the heart suit?

Since West led the ♥2, it looks as though West started with four hearts and East with six. It's possible, however, that West raised on three hearts and East started with seven. Since East won the trick with the ♥A, it looks as though West must hold the ♥K. West would have led the ♥K from a holding headed by the ♥K-Q, so you can infer that East holds the ♥Q.

That's a lot of information about the heart suit, but it isn't enough to tell you which defender holds the ♠Q or ♦Q. East must almost certainly hold the ♦A and at least one of the queens to have enough to open the bidding and subsequently bid 4♥.

East returns a heart and you ruff with a spade. You are now at the critical point in the play. How do you plan to play the spade suit?

Your earlier analysis has warned you that West is the dangerous opponent. If West gains the lead, West can lead a diamond and you might lose two diamond tricks. East, however, is the safe opponent. If you lose a trick to East, East can't lead diamonds without giving you at least one trick in the suit. The only suit in which West might be able to gain the lead is spades. It will be okay if East has the ♠Q and you lose a trick to it. It won't be okay if West has the ♠Q and you lose a trick to it. So how should you plan to play the spade suit?

You should plan to take a finesse against West for the ♠Q. If the finesse loses to East's ♠Q, East can't do any damage and you will be able to draw the remaining trumps and then discard two diamonds on dummy's clubs. So how do you play the spade suit?

It might seem that you can afford to start with the planning to follow by leading the ♠A, and taking a finesse if West follows with a low spade. If you lose to a doubleton in East's hand, the contract will be safe. If, on the other hand, the spade finesse works and East shows out, you will also be safe. But is that good enough?

Let's see. Suppose you start by leading the ♠A. West follows with a low spade and you play a low spade from dummy. East shows out, however. Oops, West started with all four missing spades. You can lead a spade and take a finesse against West's but it's not going to help. West plays low, letting your win the trick. You lead another spade to dummy's ♠K, and West now has the ♠Q remaining.

No matter what you do, eventually, West will be able to gain the lead before you can take enough club tricks to discard two of your diamonds. And, when West leads a diamond, you can be pretty sure East has both the ♦A and ♦Q once West has already shown up with the ♥K and ♠Q.

So let's go through the play again, putting your deductions to full use.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥2 and East wins the first trick. East returns a heart, and you ruff.

Knowing that West is the dangerous opponent, how can you play the spades to ensure making the contract?

Start by leading the ♠J, ♠10, or ♠9.

When West plays a low spade, you play low from dummy. If this were to lose to the ♠Q, even a singleton ♠Q, the contract will be safe. You'll lose a heart, a spade, and a diamond, but that's all.

When East shows out, you are very pleased that you took this extra precaution. You can lead another spade and repeat the finesse. You play a spade to dummy's ♠K. You come back to your hand with one of the club winners. Now you can finally play the ♠A, getting rid of West's pesky ♠Q. You are careful to discard a diamond from dummy, keeping all the clubs. With trumps drawn, you can safely take all your club winners, starting with the ♣K. On dummy's fourth and fifth club winners, you discard two of your diamond losers.

You still have to lose a diamond trick, but that's all. You've made the 4♠ contract with an overtrick. You lost a heart and a diamond, but no spades.

## Summary

Here's the full deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K85<br>♥ 97<br>♦ KJ6<br>♣ AJ975</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q632<br>♥ KJ52<br>♦ T42<br>♣ 84</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ AQT643<br>♦ AQ73<br>♣ T32</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJT974<br>♥ 8<br>♦ 985<br>♣ KQ6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You did well to bid 4♠ after East bid 4♥. Despite your side holding the majority of the strength, East would have made 4♥, losing only a diamond and two clubs.

As you suspected from the auction, East holds both the ♦A and ♦Q. You are destined to lose two diamond tricks if West regains the lead. Taking a first-round finesse against West's potential ♠Q is the only way to guarantee the contract. Plus, you are rewarded with an overtrick.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/17)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/16)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/17#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.