---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-19'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/19'

next: false
---

# 2025-01-20

In this column, how should you handle the key suit?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 72<br>♥ AJ9652<br>♦ A4<br>♣ K75</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East and West are vulnerable and your side is not. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens the bidding East passes. You must select a response.

With 12 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit, there should be enough combined strength for at least game when partner has enough to open the bidding at the one level. The priority, however, is to first determine Where the partnership belongs. You start by responding at the one level in the six-card major suit.

West passes. North raises to 2♥, and East passes. You have an opportunity to make a second call.

Partner's raise shows at least three-card support for hearts and a minimum-strength opening bid of about 12-16 points. You've now found an eight-card or longer major-suit fit. With the answers to both How High and Where, you can take the partnership to game in 4♥.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦6. Dummy comes down with four-card heart support and 13 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton diamond.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJT<br>♥ KQ73<br>♦ 95<br>♣ 864</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 72<br>♥ AJ9652<br>♦ A4<br>♣ K75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In 4♥, you can afford to lose only three tricks. In a suit contract, begin by counting the potential losers. There are no heart losers since you hold top four honors and are missing only three cards in the suit. There are no spade losers since dummy's ♠A-K will take care of the two low spades in your hand. There will be one diamond loser remaining after the ♦A is driven out. There are three potential club losers since the defenders hold all the high clubs other than the ♣K. That's a total of four potential losers: one diamond and three clubs. Since you can afford only three losers, one loser will need to be eliminated to make the contract.

You might avoid the club loser with the help of a finesse by leading toward the ♣K, hoping East holds the ♣A. That's a 50% chance.

You could create an extra winner with the help of a finesse, hoping West holds the ♠Q, a 50% chance. If the finesse works, you can repeat it to create a second winner on which to discard diamond or club losers. Even if the finesse loses, you will have created one extra winner on which to discard a loser.

So you have two 50% chances which, combined, give you a 75% chance of making the contract. Will that be good enough?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦6. You play a low diamond from dummy and East plays the ♦K. No reason to hold up since you might be able to eliminate the diamond loser. You win the ♦A.

No reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. You are missing three hearts. Both defenders follow when you play a low heart to dummy's ♥K. East follows when a low heart is played to the ♥A as West discards a low diamond. That takes care of all the defenders' trumps.

You are in the right place to try the spade finesse, one of the 50% chances. You lead a low spade and, when West follows with a low spade, you finesse dummy's ♠10. Unfortunately, this loses to East's ♠Q. So much for that chance, but you have created extra spade winners in dummy on which you can discard a couple of your losers.

However, East has the lead. East takes the defenders' established diamond winner. So much for the chance of discarding the diamond loser.

East now leads the ♣Q. You can try your second 50% chance by playing the ♣K. This isn't your day for finesses, however. West wins the ♣A. West leads a club, and East wins the ♣10. That's the fourth trick for the defense. East takes a trick with the ♣J. That's the fifth trick for the defense.

You have the rest of the tricks, but the contract has gone down two. Since you started with only four losers, perhaps you shouldn't have tried the spade finesse and settled for down one when the club finesse didn't work.

Or could you have made the contract even with the unfortunate lie of the
cards?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♦6. You play a low diamond from dummy and East plays the ♦K. You don't want to hold up winning this trick since East might switch to a club, putting the contract in danger right away. You win the ♦A. No reason to delay drawing trumps. Both defenders follow when a low heart is played to dummy's ♥K. East follows when a heart is led to the ♥A as West discards a low diamond. That takes care of the defenders' trumps.

You would like to establish an extra spade winner on which to discard one of your losers, but it would be dangerous to play a spade and finesse dummy's ♠J or 410. If the finesse loses to East, East can lead a club, trapping your ♣K when West holds the ♣A. East is the dangerous opponent. Is there a way to play the spades so, if a trick is lost, it loses to West, the safe opponent?

Yes!

You can take a ruffing finesse!

Let's see how that works. You play a spade to dummy's ♠K. Both defenders follow with low spades. You continue with the ♠A. Again, both defenders follow with low spades. You now lead the ♠J from dummy. If East holds the ♠Q and plays it, you can ruff. Dummy's ♠10 will now be a winner and you can reach it with a heart to discard one of the losers. East follows with a low spade. What now?

Discard the diamond loser!

West follows with a low spade. The ruffing finesse has succeeded and the contract is assured. East holds the ♠Q. It wouldn't have done East any good to play the since you would ruff, cross to dummy with a heart, and discard a loser on the established ♠10.

With the contract secure, you can now try for an overtrick by leading a club to the ♣K. This loses to West's ♣A, but that's okay.

West leads a diamond, but you can ruff, having eliminated the diamond loser.

You still have two clubs to lose, but you have made the contract.

But what if West held the and you lost the trick when you discarded the diamond loser?

Let's see.

## Another Possible Layout

West leads the ♦6. East plays the ♦K and you win the ♦A. You don't want to let the dangerous opponent have the lead. You draw trumps in two rounds. You take dummy's two top spades. You don't want to lose a spade finesse to the dangerous opponent. You lead the ♠J from dummy and, when East follows with a low spade, you discard the diamond loser, taking the ruffing finesse.

This time West turns up with the ♠Q. The ruffing finesse lost but, there's good news. It lost to the safe opponent, West, who can't hurt you by leading a club. At the same time, you've established dummy's ♠10 as a winner.

West tries to take a diamond trick but you can ruff, having discarded the diamond loser. You can cross to dummy with a heart. You lead the established ♠10 from dummy and discard one of the club losers. The contract is now secure.

You can try for an overtrick by leading to the ♣K. This loses to the ♣A. No overtrick, but that's okay. The defenders take a second club trick.

You have the last two tricks, making the contract. You lost a spade trick and two club tricks, but that's all. You made the contract even though West held the and the ruffing finesse lost.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJT<br>♥ KQ73<br>♦ 95<br>♣ 864</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 953<br>♥ T<br>♦ QT863<br>♣ A932</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q863<br>♥ 84<br>♦ KJ72<br>♣ QJT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 72<br>♥ AJ9652<br>♦ A4<br>♣ K75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The spade suit on this deal offers a 100% chance for making the contract, no matter which defender holds the missing ♠Q. By taking a ruffing finesse - playing the ♠A-K and then leading the ♠J - you make the contract whenever East holds the ♠Q. However, you also make the contract whenever West holds the since, if the ruffing finesse loses, it loses to the safe opponent, West. You discard the diamond loser so West can't put East on lead to play a club.

It's important to see this type of spade holding allows you to play for either defender to hold the ♠Q, either by taking a straightforward finesse or taking a ruffing finesse.

On this deal, the ruffing finesse is the sure way to make the contract no matter which defender holds the ♠Q.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/20)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/18)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/20#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.