---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-20'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/20'

next:
  text: '2025-01-22'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/22'
---

# 2025-01-21

In today's deal, declarer is hoping you'd make a mistake. Can you avoid it?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J962<br>♥ JT53<br>♦ K7<br>♣ Q98</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. West is the dealer and opens 1NT, showing a balanced hand of about 15-17 points. Your partner, North, passes, and East responds 2♣, the Stayman convention. You have to decide what call to make with this hand.

You have only 7 high-card points and no reason to enter the auction. East is showing interest in finding a major-suit fit and you don't mind defending if the opponents play in a major. You pass.

West replies 2♥, showing a four-card or longer heart suit. Partner passes, and East jumps to 3NT. The auction is back to you.

The auction is much too high for you to do anything except pass.

West and partner also pass, ending the auction. Partner will now be making the opening lead against West's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♦Q, and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AQ85<br>♥ A84<br>♦ 943<br>♣ J65</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J962<br>♥ JT53<br>♦ K7<br>♣ Q98</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

East used the Stayman convention, hoping to find a spade fit.

Declarer plays the ♦3 from dummy. You have your first key decision. What are you playing to this trick?

It looks as though it would be wasteful to play the ♦K on the same trick. If partner's ♦Q wins the trick, partner will likely continue a diamond. Your ♦K will then either win a second trick for your side or force out the ♦A if declarer has it. So let's see what will happen if you play a low diamond.

Suppose you play the ♦7. Partner's ♦Q wins the first trick as declarer also plays a low diamond. Either partner has the ♦A or declarer is holding up with the ♦A. Partner continues with the ♦J. Another low diamond is played from dummy, and this time you have to play the ♦K. Declarer plays a low diamond. Now what?

With no diamonds remaining, you can't continue the suit. Looking at dummy's four spades, you don't want to lead a spade and develop winners for declarer. You also don't want to lead a heart since you know declarer holds four hearts. You could lead a club but that won't help you defeat the contract. Let's see why.

Here are all the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T4<br>♥ 96<br>♦ T85<br>♣ K432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K73<br>♥ KQ72<br>♦ A<br>♣ AT7</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AQ85<br>♥ A84<br>♦ 9<br>♣ J65</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J962<br>♥ JT53<br>♦ <br>♣ Q98</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Suppose you lead a club, declarer plays low, and partner wins with the ♣K. Suppose partner returns a diamond. You now have a problem. If you discard a heart or a spade, declarer will get four tricks in that suit. If you discard a club, declarer will eventually get two club tricks. No matter what you do, declarer will have enough tricks to make the 3NT contract.

Let's go back to trick one to look at the defense again.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♦Q and a low diamond is played from dummy.

In this situation, it is usually best to play your honor on partner's honor to avoid blocking the suit.

Could playing two of the defenders' honors on the same trick be costly?

Possibly. If dummy held ♦10-9-3, for example, it would be costly to play the ♦K on the ♦Q if declarer holds the ♦A. Declarer would get two diamond tricks instead of one. So there are times when you can't afford to unblock the suit. However, in this situation, it is unlikely to cost. Partner typically leads the ♦Q from a holding headed by a solid sequence, ♦Q-J-10, or a broken sequence, ♦Q-J-9. Since you can see the ♦9 in dummy, partner is presumably leading from a suit headed by the ♦Q-J-10. So, here, you should play the ♦K on partner's ♦Q.

Declarer plays a low diamond, and your ♦K wins the trick. You now lead your remaining low diamond. Declarer plays low again, and partner wins the ♦10. Partner did indeed lead from a solid sequence in diamonds. Partner continues with the ♦5. The ♦9 is played from dummy, and you have another critical decision to make. What are you going to discard on this trick?

One guideline in this situation is to try to "keep the same length as dummy." Dummy has four spades. Since declarer probably has a doubleton or tripleton ♠K for the 1NT opening, partner can't prevent dummy's fourth spade from becoming a winner. It's up to you to protect the suit for the partnership. There's also another guideline in this situation: "Keep the same length as declarer." You can't see declarer's hand, but what is one thing you know about it?

Declarer has four hearts!

Declarer showed four hearts in reply to East's Stayman inquiry. So partner has only two hearts. You are the only member of the partnership that can guard against declarer's fourth heart from becoming a winner. However, if you have to protect both the spades and the hearts for your side, you will have to discard a club. Can you afford to do that?

You can't tell for sure. But, if you have to guard both spades and hearts, you are going to have to hope that partner has something in clubs. Besides, partner has sent you a message that partner likely holds something in clubs! Partner has led the ♦5, the lowest-ranking remaining diamond. In a situation like this where partner is establishing diamond winners, partner wants to let you know in which suit partner may have an entry. So the ♦5 is a suit preference signal for the lower-ranking of the remaining suits, clubs. So let's see what will happen if you reluctantly discard a club.

You discard a club, and declarer wins with the ♦A. Declarer plays a heart to dummy's ♥A as both you and partner follow with low hearts. Declarer leads a low heart from dummy. Should you "split your honors" and play either the ♥J or ♥10?

No! You don't want to give declarer any help. First, declarer doesn't know the hearts aren't breaking. Second, if you play one of your honors, declarer may be able to finesse and trap your remaining honor later. You play a low heart, and declarer wins the trick with the ♥Q as partner follows with the ♥9. Declarer plays the ♥K, winning the trick as partner shows out, discarding the ♣4. You did well to hold on to all your hearts. Otherwise, declarer's last heart would now be a winner.

Declarer takes a trick with the ♣A. Partner follows with the ♣2 and you play your last low club. You are hoping you didn't make a mistake by discarding a club earlier. However, partner has played the ♣4-2, which looks to be an encouraging attitude signal.

Declarer takes a trick with the ♠K. Both you and partner follow with low spades. Declarer plays a spade to dummy's ♠A. Both you and partner again follow suit. Declarer takes a trick with dummy's ♠Q. You and declarer follow suit, but partner shows out, discarding another club. Looks like you did well to hold on to all your spades. Otherwise, dummy's ♠8 would now be a winner.

With neither hearts nor spades breaking favorably, declarer has run out of options. Declarer leads a club, and partner wins the ♣K. Partner takes the last two tricks with the established diamond winners. Your side has defeated the 3NT contract. You got four diamond tricks and a club.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T4<br>♥ 96<br>♦ QJT85<br>♣ K432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K73<br>♥ KQ72<br>♦ A62<br>♣ AT7</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AQ85<br>♥ A84<br>♦ 943<br>♣ J65</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J962<br>♥ JT53<br>♦ K7<br>♣ Q98</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer starts with eight sure tricks: three spades, three hearts, a club, and a diamond. Declarer has to hope that the defenders' six hearts divide 3-3, or the six spades divide 3-3, or the defenders make a mistake. To defeat the contract, you have to unblock the diamond suit and then hold on to both your spades and your hearts. The guidelines of trying to keep the same length as dummy and the same length as declarer proved useful on this deal.

You won't always be able to do everything, but you have to do the best you can to guard against declarer developing extra winners.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/21)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/14)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/28)

### By Date

Use the links below.