---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-22'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/22'

next:
  text: '2025-01-24'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/24'
---

# 2025-01-23

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQT8<br>♥ 3<br>♦ A8652<br>♣ 643</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens 1♥. East passes, and you have to choose a response.

You have 9 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. For some partnerships, that might be enough to respond at the two level. However, with no fit for opener's suit, it is best to be cautious. Responding 1♠ seems the most practical choice, whether playing standard methods or two-over-one game force.

West passes, and partner makes a jump raise of your suit to 3♠. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Partner's jump raise to 3♠ is invitational, showing four-card spade support and a medium-strength opening bid of about 17-18 points. With 10 points, you have enough to accept the invitation and continue to game in the eight-card major-suit fit.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣Q, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ97<br>♥ AQ762<br>♦ 9<br>♣ K75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQT8<br>♥ 3<br>♦ A8652<br>♣ 643</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 14 high-card points and, with four-card support for spades, added 3 dummy points for the singleton diamond.

In a suit contract, the first step is to consider the potential losers you have. There are no heart losers since dummy's ♥A will take care of the singleton heart in your hand. There are three potential club losers since the defenders hold all the high clubs other than the ♣K. There will be four diamond losers left in your hand after the ♦A is gone. So there are three potential club losers and four potential diamond losers. Since you can afford only three losers, you will need to eliminate four losers.

To avoid a club loser, the best hope is that West holds the so you can get a trick by leading toward dummy's ♣K. That's typically a 50% chance. Will that be the case on this deal?

No! West has led the ♣Q. Since a defender almost never leads away from an ace on opening lead, East almost certainly holds the ♣A. Is there any way to avoid losing three club tricks if East holds the ♣A?

The only hope is that East started with a singleton or doubleton ♣A. Then, provided you don't play dummy's on West's club lead, the ♣K will become a winner.

If you do have to lose three club tricks, is there any way to avoid the four diamond losers?

You could hope to establish one or two extra heart winners in dummy on which to discard one or two of the diamond losers. A better plan, however, is to ruff all four diamond losers with dummy's four trumps. You can get back to your hand each time by ruffing a heart... a crossruff. Since you have all the high spades, an opponent won't be able to overruff and spoil the fun. So you can hope to avoid a club loser and plan to ruff the diamond losers in dummy.

Are there any potential problems?

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣Q. What are you playing from dummy to the first trick?

Since East almost certainly holds the ♣A, play low from dummy. You don't want to "waste" the ♣K. East plays the ♣9 and you follow with a low club. No singleton with East.

West continues with the ♣J. Again, you play low, hoping East might have to play the ♣A. No luck. East plays the ♣2, finishing an encouraging attitude signal. West wins the second trick. West continues with another club. This time, there's no choice but to play the ♣K. As you expected, East wins the trick with the ♣A. So much for your first chance for making the contract. The opponents have taken the first three club tricks. You need to take the rest of the tricks. That shouldn't be a problem if East now leads a heart or a diamond. You can crossruff to take the rest of the tricks.

Unfortunately, East switches to a spade. You win the trick with the ♠8. You've reached the critical point in the play. Now what?

You can no longer ruff all four of the diamond losers in dummy. Perhaps you can establish the last diamond as a winner if the defenders' seven diamonds are divided 4-3. Let's see if that idea will work on this deal.

Suppose you take a trick with the ♦A. Both defenders follow suit. Suppose you continue with another diamond and ruff it in dummy. Again, both defenders follow suit. You need to get back to your hand so you can ruff another diamond. You can't afford to use a spade. You need dummy's spades to ruff your diamond losers. So you have to take a trick with the ♥A. You next lead a heart and ruff it to get back to your hand. You ruff another diamond in dummy. Both defenders follow suit once more. The defenders' diamonds have divided 4-3, but there is still a high diamond outstanding. To get back to your hand, you ruff a heart. You can ruff another diamond in dummy as West follows with the defenders' last diamond. Your remaining diamond has now been established as a winner.

But you now have a problem. You need to get back to your hand, draw the defenders' remaining trumps, and then play your diamond winner. Sadly, you don't have enough trumps remaining to do all that.

You get back to your hand by ruffing another heart. When you lead the established diamond winner, East still has a trump remaining. 4♠ is down one.

Let's go back and see what you might have done after the defenders had taken the first three club tricks and switched to a trump.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣Q. You correctly play low from dummy, but with West holding the ♣Q-J-8 and East the ♣A-9-2, the defenders take the first three club tricks. East now leads the ♠2, and you win with the ♠8.

East's shift to a trump leaves you a trick short if you simply start to crossruff, using the trumps in both hands. You will get only seven trump tricks - the trick you just won and three ruffs in each hand - plus your two aces, the ♥A and ♦A. That's nine tricks. Where can a tenth trick come from?

You need to get an extra trick from the heart suit.

How can you do that?

One possibility is to try to establish dummy's ♥Q as a winner by ruffing one or more hearts, hoping the ♥K will fall. The odds of that working is a little more than 25%. A much more straightforward approach is to try the heart finesse, hoping West holds the ♥K. That's a 50% chance. Let's see how that works.

You lead the singleton heart. When West follows with a low heart, you finesse dummy's ♥Q. If this loses, you will go down an extra trick. Not only will you lose the heart trick, the defenders will lead another spade and then you can ruff only two of your diamond losers. East follows with a low heart. The finesse has worked! You have the extra trick you need. You take a trick with the ♥A. As long as East can't ruff this, you should be okay. East follows with another heart, and you discard one of your diamond losers.

With all the top trumps in both hands, you should be fine from here. You play a diamond to the ♦A and, when both defenders follow, the contract is assured. You have the rest of the tricks with a "high" crossruff. You lead a diamond and ruff it in dummy. You ruff a heart with a high trump in your hand. Another diamond is ruffed in dummy. You lead a heart from dummy. East ruffs with a low spade, but you can overruff. That's the advantage of having all the high trumps. The last diamond is ruffed in dummy. With nothing but trumps remaining, East can't do anything except underruff with a low trump.

The last heart is led from dummy. East again ineffectually plays a low trump and you overruff with your last trump. You've made the 4♠ contract, losing only the first three club tricks.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ97<br>♥ AQ762<br>♦ 9<br>♣ K75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 5<br>♥ K954<br>♦ QT73<br>♣ QJT8</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 6432<br>♥ JT8<br>♦ KJ4<br>♣ A92</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQT8<br>♥ 3<br>♦ A8652<br>♣ 643</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The basic plan is to get the tricks you need through a crossruff, taking your trumps separately in each hand.

When planning a crossruff, you first count your side-suit winners and add them to your potential trump winners to make sure you have enough tricks. If East had not led a trump at trick four, you could get two aces and eight trump tricks. After East leads a trump, you can no longer get eight trump tricks, so you need an extra side-suit trick, the ♥Q. When the heart finesse works, you have three side-suit tricks to go with seven trump tricks, six of which you get through a crossruff. You are back to ten winners.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/23)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/20)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/24)

### By Date

Use the links below.