---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-23'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/23'

next:
  text: '2025-01-25'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/25'
---

# 2025-01-24

On this deal, which suit gives you a realistic chance of the extra tricks you need?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK7<br>♥ QT5<br>♦ 9873<br>♣ Q54</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens 1♠. Your partner, North, overcalls 2♦, and East passes. The auction has come around to you.

For a two-level overcall, partner should have a good five- or six-card diamond suit, and about the values for an opening bid or more. With four-card support for diamonds, you could raise partner's suit. However, you have a balanced hand, two solid spade stoppers, and probable stoppers in both hearts and clubs. Your hand is worth an invitation to game. When the partnership's main suit is a minor and there is enough combined strength to consider getting to game, you always think about playing in notrump. If you want to go for the game bonus, it's often much easier to win nine tricks in notrump than eleven tricks with a minor suit as trump. So let's go with an invitational bid of 2NT.

West passes, and partner accepts your invitation, bidding 3NT. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Partner has bid exactly what you were hoping to hear, so you have no reason to do anything except pass. With a hand unsuitable for notrump, partner could have gone back to 3♦, knowing you will have at least some support.

West passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠4, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 52<br>♥ KJ<br>♦ KQJT6<br>♣ AJ72</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AK7<br>♥ QT5<br>♦ 9873<br>♣ Q54</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 15 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit, more than enough to accept your invitation.

In your notrump contract, start by counting the sure tricks. You have two spade winners, the ♠A-K. You don't have any sure tricks in hearts or diamonds, but you have one sure club winner, the ♣A. That's only three tricks. You need to build six more.

You aren't getting any more tricks from the spade suit.

In hearts, you can promote two winners by driving out the ♥A. In clubs, you can get an extra winner with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♣K. Even if the finesse loses, you will have promoted one extra trick and might get a second if the six missing clubs are divided 3-3. You might also get two extra tricks if West started with a singleton or doubleton ♣K.

In diamonds, you can promote four winners by forcing out the ♦A.

There's no shortage of winners that can be established: two in hearts, one or two in clubs, and four in diamonds. So, what's the problem?

The issue is notrump contracts often play out as a race to see which side can first establish the tricks needed to make or defeat the contract.

On this deal, you want to develop and take nine tricks before the opponents can develop and take five or more tricks. The opponents have an advantage since they make the opening lead and can start to establish winners in their long suit right away. West opened the bidding 1♠, showing a five-card or longer suit, and has led a spade. Once your ♠A and ♠K are driven out, the opponents will have at least three spade tricks and two aces to take if they gain the lead before you have nine tricks. So, the race is on!

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

One general strategy when the opponents have led their long suit is to hold up taking your winner or winners in the suit. The idea is to try to interfere with their communications by exhausting one of them - presumably East on this deal - of the suit completely. If you then lose a trick to the opponent with no cards remaining in the long suit, they can't take the established winners unless they can find an entry to their partner's hand. So, when you play a low spade from dummy to the first trick and East plays the ♠Q, you can let East win the trick. If East's were a singleton, for example, East could no longer lead a spade, making it difficult for the defenders to establish the suit.

East, however, does have another spade, and continues with the ♠10. You have no choice but to win this trick. There goes one of your spade stoppers. What next?

The natural play is to start on the diamonds, where you can promote four of the six winners you need. You lead a diamond from your hand, and West immediately wins the ♦A. Does it matter what you play from dummy?

With all the top diamonds, it is prudent to unblock one of dummy's diamonds, keeping dummy's ♦6 as a link card in case you need an entry back to your hand later.

West continues with another spade, and you must find a discard from dummy. You are now up to seven tricks: two spades, a club, and four diamonds. You need two more. So let's assume you discard a club, keeping all the hearts.

You win the trick as East follows with a spade. You still need two more tricks. You are at the critical point in the play. You have to decide whether to try to establish them in hearts or in clubs.

In clubs, you will need a lucky lie of the cards since you don't have the ♣10. You will need West to hold either a singleton or doubleton ♣K.

In hearts, you don't need a favorable division of the suit. You can promote the two heart winners by simply driving out the ♥A. And you've kept a diamond entry to your hand in case you need it to reach the second established heart winner in your hand.

So it looks as though the heart suit offers a sure way to get what you need. Let's see if that will help you on this deal.

Suppose you lead a low heart. West rises with the ♥A. You can unblock by playing dummy's ♥K. When you regain the lead, you can then use dummy's ♥J as a link card to your heart winners.

West, however, now takes a trick with the ♠J as East discards a low heart. West has started with a five-card spade suit, as you should have expected based on the auction. West has one more spade trick to take.

You have the rest of the tricks, but 3NT is down one. You lost a diamond, a heart, and three spade tricks.

Where did you go wrong?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♠7, and you correctly let East win the first trick. East returns the ♠10. You win with one of the high spades. Next, you want to establish your diamond winners. West immediately wins the ♦A. You play one of dummy's high honors, preserving the ♦6 as a link card to your hand. West continues with another spade. You win with your last high spade and discard a club in dummy. East follows suit to this trick.

Before you decide what to do next, it's time to play detective. What do you know about the spade suit?

West has shown a five-card or longer spade suit with the 1♠ opening. Dummy had two and you started with three. East followed suit three times. That tells you West must have started with only five spades. So West now has two established spade winners.

You've won two spade tricks and have four established diamonds and one club to take. You need two more. Which suit will you have the best chance of getting the tricks you need? Hearts or clubs?

Even though you have a 100% chance of getting two extra hearts after driving out the ♥A, if West has the ♥A, West will win and take the spades to defeat the contract. If East holds the ♥A, however, you'll be okay. East has no more spades to lead and won't be able to get West on lead before you have the tricks you need. Can East hold the ♥A?

No!

West opened the bidding and should have about 12 or more high-card points. Also, East would have raised spades with three-card support and 6 points. You've already seen the ♠Q from East, so East can't hold the ♥A. West has shown up so far with only the ♦A and ♠J. West needs both the ♥A and ♣K for the opening bid. So trying to get the two extra tricks in hearts won't work. You need to rely on the clubs.

Should you lead the ♣Q from your hand?

No!

Most defenders have learned to cover an honor with an honor. So, if you lead the ♣Q, West will cover with the forcing you to win the ♣A. You can take a trick with the ♣J but, since you don't have the ♣10, you can't get a second extra trick.

What's the alternative?

You must lead a low club from your hand.

That gives you a chance that West started with a singleton ♣K. Then you'll get ten tricks with both the ♣J and ♣Q.

West follows with a low club. No singleton ♣K. The good news is that at least you know from your detective work that West holds the ♣K. So you confidently finesse the and it wins the trick. You are up to eight tricks. What next?

It won't help to come back to your hand and lead the ♣Q. West will cover with the ♣K and you'll be left with only eight tricks. You have only one chance left. You have to play the ♣A. You are going to need the ♣K to fall on this trick. East follows with a low cub, you follow with a low club, and... the ♣K appears from West. Success! West started with a doubleton ♣K. You now get a trick with the ♣Q. You have the last extra trick you need.

You can take the established diamond winners, making the 3NT contract. You took two spade tricks, four diamond tricks, and three club tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 52<br>♥ KJ<br>♦ KQJT6<br>♣ AJ72</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J9843<br>♥ A974<br>♦ A2<br>♣ K3</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QT6<br>♥ 8632<br>♦ 54<br>♣ T986</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AK7<br>♥ QT5<br>♦ 9873<br>♣ Q54</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When making your plan, you usually have various possibilities to consider for getting the tricks you need. To decide among them, you need to take into consideration the available clues.

On this deal, your detective work determines that trying to get tricks from the heart suit just isn't going to work. The only possible chance is the club suit. It may not have a great chance of success, but any chance is better than none. Actually, the odds aren't that bad. You already know West has the ♣K. You just need West to have fewer than three clubs... and you must play the suit combination correctly.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/24)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/23)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/25)

### By Date

Use the links below.