---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-26'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/26'

next:
  text: '2025-01-28'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/28'
---

# 2025-01-27

In today's contract, is there a good chance for an overtrick?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ963<br>♥ 632<br>♦ AQ6<br>♣ 95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. You are the dealer and have to decide what call to make in first position.

There are 12 high-card points and you can add 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. Although the hand is balanced, it is too weak to open 1NT. You can start by opening the five-card major suit, 1♠.

West overcalls 2♥. Partner cuebids 3♥, the opponent's suit. East passes and you have to choose what to do after this development.

Partner's cuebid of the opponent's suit shows a fit for spades and at least game-invitational values. With a minimum for the opening bid, you don't want to be any higher if partner has only an invitational hand. You return to the agreed trump suit at the three level.

West passes, and partner now bids 4♠. East passes, and the auction is back to you once more.

Partner presumably has better than an invitational raise for the cuebid. You still don't have anything extra, so you pass and accept partner's decision.

West also passes. That ends the auction and you are the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥Q.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ JT74<br>♥ AK4<br>♦ JT4<br>♣ AK8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ963<br>♥ 632<br>♦ AQ6<br>♣ 95</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner puts down the dummy with four-card spade support and 16 high-card points, certainly enough to want to be in game after you opened the bidding.

The first step in 4♠ is to count the potential losers. There is a potential spade loser since you are missing the ♠K. There will be a heart loser remaining after the ♥A and ♥K are driven out. There are no club losers since dummy's and will take care of the two low clubs in your hand. There is a potential diamond loser since the opponents hold the ♦K. That's only three losers: one spade, one heart, and one diamond. Since you can afford three losers, there's no real need to Browse Declarer's Checklist except to see if any of the losers can be eliminated so you can make one or more overtricks.

The spade loser might be eliminated with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♠K. That's a 50% chance and the finesse can be repeated as often as necessary, even if West holds all four of the missing spades.

Similarly, the diamond loser can be avoided with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♦K. That's another 50% chance and, again, the finesse can be repeated if necessary.

So there are two chances for an overtrick. Is that all there is to consider on this deal?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West leads the ♥Q. You win the first trick with dummy's ♥K. You are in the right place to try the spade finesse. Suppose you lead the ♠J and East follows with a low spade. You play a low spade and West wins the ♠K. So much for that finesse.

West leads the ♥10 and you play dummy's ♥A. Oops! East ruffs with a low spade. That's a loser you weren't counting on. East leads a low diamond and you have no choice now but to try the diamond finesse. Unfortunately this finesse loses to West's ♦K. Neither of your finesses has worked. West takes a trick with the ♥J. That's the fourth trick for the defense.

Whatever West leads next, you can win and draw the remaining trump. However, the contract is down one. Both finesses lost.

Could you have done better?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥Q and you win the first trick with dummy's ♥K.

The contract doesn't appear to be in any trouble, but that's the time to consider what might go wrong. The only danger to the contract is if the defenders can ruff one of your winners. If you review the auction, West overcalled 2♥, showing a five-card or longer suit. That makes it possible East started with only a singleton heart. If you lose a trick to West before trumps are drawn, West might lead another heart and East could ruff, defeating the contract if the diamond finesse loses.

There's no need to risk the contract for the sake of an overtrick.

You want to draw all the defenders' trumps as quickly as possible and you can afford to lose one spade trick.

Instead of taking the spade finesse, you play a low spade to the ♠A. Both defenders follow with low spades. You lead another spade and West wins the ♠K as East follows with another low spade. The contract is now safe since all the defenders' trumps have been drawn.

West leads another heart and you win dummy's ♥A as East shows out, discarding a low club. It's a good thing East didn't have any spades remaining. With trumps drawn, it's now safe to try the diamond finesse. This loses to West's ♦K. That's okay. You are still going to make the contract.

West takes the defenders' established heart winner.

Whatever West leads next, you have the rest of the tricks. You've made the contract, losing only one spade, one heart, and one diamond.

But what if East started with three spades, including the ♠K?

Let's see.

## Another Possible Layout

West leads the ♥Q and you win the first trick with dummy's ♥K.

Since the only danger to the contract is if the defenders can ruff one of your winners, you start drawing trumps as quickly as possible. You play a spade to the and both defenders follow with low spades. You continue with another spade. This time, West shows out, discarding a low heart. You play the ♠10 from the dummy and East wins the ♠K. Too bad. The spade finesse would have worked!

East leads a diamond. You have another challenge. You'd like to try the diamond finesse, but you can't afford to. East still has a trump remaining and West is the dangerous opponent. You win the ♦A. You now draw East's remaining trump. The contract is safe and you can drive out the defenders' ♦K. It's with West, so it's a good thing you didn't try the diamond finesse.

West leads a high heart to drive out dummy's ♥A. East shows out, as you feared, but East has no trump remaining to ruff your winner.

You still have a heart to lose, but you've made the contract. Since East held the ♠K, you could have made an overtrick, but you put safety first.

## Summary

Here's the full deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ JT74<br>♥ AK4<br>♦ JT4<br>♣ AK8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K5<br>♥ QJT975<br>♦ K97<br>♣ Q7</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 82<br>♥ 8<br>♦ 8532<br>♣ JT6432</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ963<br>♥ 632<br>♦ AQ6<br>♣ 95</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When going through the plan, even if you don't need to Browse the Checklist for additional winners or to eliminate losers, you still need to go through the third step, Consider the Order. One of the considerations is any danger represented by the opponents.

On this deal, the auction tells you there is some danger of East ruffing one of your heart winners. In fact, you've already been fortunate when East follows to the first round of hearts. At least West didn't start with a seven-card heart suit. You now want to draw trumps as quickly and safely as possible. You can afford to lose one trump trick, but not two. So there's no need to risk the spade finesse. Guaranteeing the contract is the priority.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/27)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/25)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/27#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.