---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-27'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/27'

next:
  text: '2025-01-29'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/29'
---

# 2025-01-28

In today's deal, is one ruff enough?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K85<br>♥ T854<br>♦ 7<br>♣ A9743</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 1♠. You must decide what call to make.

You have only 7 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card club suit. You don't have nearly a good enough suit or good enough hand to overcall in your mediocre five-card suit at the two level, especially vulnerable. You pass.

West makes an invitational limit raise to 3♠, showing four-card spade support and about 10-12 points. Your partner, North, passes, and East accepts the invitation by bidding 4♠. You have another chance to bid.

You certainly have nothing to say at this level. You pass.

West and partner also pass, ending the auction. You now have to choose the opening lead against East's 4♠ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

You have a likely spade trick, assuming East holds the ♠A, and a club winner. You need to find two more tricks on defense.

You don't want to lead a club since it's a poor idea to lead an unsupported ace against a suit contract, and it's an even poorer idea to lead away from an ace.

A heart lead is relatively safe, but unlikely to be the best choice.

The signs appear right to lead the singleton diamond, looking to ruff one or more of declarer's diamond winners. If partner holds the ♦A, you may defeat the contract immediately. Even if declarer wins the first trick, you will likely regain the lead with the ♠K before declarer can draw all your trumps. You'll then have an opportunity to find an entry to partner's hand.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♦7, and West puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT94<br>♥ 973<br>♦ KQT84<br>♣ J</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K85<br>♥ T854<br>♦ 7<br>♣ A9743</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The appearance of the ♠A in dummy is a disappointment. Your ♠K is no longer likely to be a winner.

A low diamond is played from dummy, and partner wins the first trick with the ♦A as declarer follows with the ♦2. That's an excellent start. It looks as though you are going to get your ruff, even if you do not get a trick with the ♠K. Indeed, partner returns the ♦3. Declarer plays the ♦J, and you ruff with a low spade. That's the first two tricks for the defense. You are now at the critical point in the defense. What are you going to play next?

If the ♠A weren't in dummy, there would be no problem. You could take the ♣A and sit back and wait for a trick with the ♠K. Now it's not so easy.

One possibility is to take the ♣A and hope declarer doesn't take a finesse against your ♠K, perhaps afraid you would get a second ruff if the finesse lost. Or partner might hold the ♠Q and you are going to get a spade trick anyway.

Another possibility is to lead a heart. If partner has the ♥A, you could get another diamond ruff to defeat the contract. Even if partner doesn't hold the ♥A, you may be able to establish a heart winner to go with the ♣A. If that's the plan, you don't want to take the ♣A first in case it establishes club winners for declarer which can then be used to discard heart losers from dummy.

It looks like a tough decision. Let's see what will happen if you lead a heart.

Suppose you lead a heart. A low heart is played from dummy, partner plays the ♥J, and declarer wins the ♥Q. No second diamond ruff, and it doesn't look as though you are getting any heart tricks.

Declarer leads the ♠J. You play low, hoping partner has the ♠Q. But when declarer plays low from dummy, partner plays the ♠7. No more spade tricks for your side. Declarer leads another spade, and your ♠K falls to dummy's ♠A.

Here are the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ 6<br>♦ 96<br>♣ KT652</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T9<br>♥ 97<br>♦ KQT<br>♣ J</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q63<br>♥ AK2<br>♦ <br>♣ Q8</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ T85<br>♦ <br>♣ A9743</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You aren't defeating the 4♠ contract. You aren't getting any spade, heart, or diamond tricks at this point. And you won't even get a club trick since declarer can discard any club losers on dummy's diamonds.

Let's go back and see if there was anything you might have done.

## Recommended Defense

You lead your singleton diamond, and partner wins the first trick with the ♦A as declarer follows with the ♦2. Partner returns the ♦3, declarer follows with the ♦J, and you ruff with a low spade. You now have to decide what to do... or do you?

Partner has sent you a message by returning the ♦3 for you to ruff.

Partner presumably had a choice of diamonds to lead back for you to ruff. Why did partner choose the ♦3?

Partner is suggesting that you lead a club!

Since declarer followed to the first trick with the ♦2, the ♦3 is partner's lowest remaining diamond. When partner expects you are about to ruff a trick, partner tries to send a suit preference signal to help you decide what to do next.

Partner's lowest-ranking diamond shows a preference for the lower-ranking of the two "obvious" suits, hearts and clubs. Why would partner be suggesting you lead a club when you hold the ♣A?

Partner presumably holds the ♣K!

Partner doesn't know you hold the but partner is sending the message that partner has "something" potentially useful in clubs but not in hearts. If partner held something useful in hearts - the ♥A or ♥K - partner would have returned the highest-ranking diamond partner holds. With no preference for either suit, partner would return a middle-ranking diamond.

If you trust partner's message, what should you lead to trick three?

A low club!

Your side can't take more than one club trick. If you take the ♣A, that will likely be the last trick for your side. But if you lead a low club... The ♣J is played from dummy, and partner plays the ♣K, winning the trick as declarer follows with a low club. Partner was sending the correct message! Partner leads another diamond, and it turns out declarer is now void in diamonds. Declarer tries ruffing with the ♠Q, hoping your partner holds the ♠K. However, you can overruff with the ♠K, winning the trick as dummy follows with a diamond.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but that's okay. Your side has the first four tricks: a diamond, a club, and two diamond ruffs.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ J6<br>♦ A9653<br>♣ KT652</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AT94<br>♥ 973<br>♦ KQT84<br>♣ J</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QJ632<br>♥ AKQ2<br>♦ J2<br>♣ Q8</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K85<br>♥ T854<br>♦ 7<br>♣ A9743</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, you got off to the only lead to defeat the contract. You were hoping to get a trick with the ♠K, a trick with the ♣A, a trick from partner, and a diamond ruff. You found partner with the perfect entry, the ♦A. You were able to get the diamond ruff right away.

The appearance of the ♠A in dummy instead of declarer's hand, however, meant you needed to adjust your plan. You needed to find a second entry to partner's hand so you could get a second ruff. Fortunately, partner could be fairly confident your lead was a singleton and could anticipate the problem you would be faced with once you got the first diamond ruff. Partner couldn't see your hand but could see the dummy. With nothing much in hearts, partner could see that a heart return from you would likely be ineffectual. A club return from you, however, couldn't really hurt and might just be the best defense. So partner sent you a suit preference signal by leading back the ♦3.

Partner's foresight was rewarded when you had the confidence to trust partner's signal. Bridge is certainly a partnership game.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/28)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/21)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/30)

### By Date

Use the links below.