---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-29'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/29'

next:
  text: '2025-01-31'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/31'
---

# 2025-01-30

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 765<br>♥ 875<br>♦ J9<br>♣ AKT97</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. West is the dealer and opens 1NT, 15-17. Partner, North, passes, and East responds 2♣, the Stayman convention. You have your first chance to make a call.

With West opening 1NT and East presumably showing an invitational hand or better, it may seem that you should simply pass. However, you have an opportunity to help your side on defense. Since East's 2♣ is artificial, you can make a lead-directing double. The double is not for takeout. It simply shows length and strength in clubs and, if partner ends up on lead, you would prefer a club lead to anything else. Your clubs are good enough that you can probably defeat if both opponents were to pass the double, or even if the opponents were to redouble.

West passes. Partner also passes, and East jumps to game, 3NT. The auction is back to you.

You have already done what you can by suggesting a lead to partner. No reason to do anything but pass.

West and partner also pass, ending the auction. Partner will be making the opening lead against West's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♣8. Partner didn't miss the message you sent during the auction. East puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AKJT<br>♥ JT43<br>♦ 86<br>♣ 543</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 765<br>♥ 875<br>♦ J9<br>♣ AKT97</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays the ♣3 from dummy. Right away, you are faced with a critical decision. What are you playing to this trick?

It's tempting to win the trick with the ♣K, playing third hand high, but only as high as necessary. Let's see what will happen if you do.

Let's suppose you choose to win the first trick with the ♣K. Declarer follows with a low club. You continue with the ♣A. West's ♣J falls on this trick as partner follows with the ♣2. You've won the first two tricks, and the only remaining high club outstanding is the ♣Q. You continue with another club to drive out declarer's ♣Q and establish your remaining clubs as winners. Partner discards a diamond.

Declarer now leads the ♥Q and partner wins the ♥A. That's the third trick for the defense. With no clubs left to lead, partner leads a low diamond.
Your ♦J is won by declarer's ♦A.

Declarer now claims the rest of the tricks, with three established heart winners, four spades, and the ♦K, making the 3NT contract with an overtrick.

If you hadn't doubled clubs, partner would likely have led a diamond, but that wouldn't have defeated the contract. Declarer would win, drive out the ♥A, and have ten tricks. You'd eventually get your ♣A-K. So your lead-directing double didn't hurt the defense but didn't seem to help.

Or did it?

Let's return to the first trick.

## Recommended Defense

When partner leads the ♣8 and a low club is played from dummy, you shouldn't be in a hurry to win the first trick with the ♣K. As you've seen, if you then continue with the and another club, you will establish your remaining clubs as winners. Unfortunately, you don't have an entry to your hand outside the club suit. Even if partner wins a trick, partner won't be able to reach your hand.

If partner started with three or more low clubs, partner would have led the lowest club. Partner can't be leading the ♣8 from a three-card holding headed by an honor. The only higher cards missing are the ♣Q-J and then partner would lead the the top of touching honors in the suit you asked to be led. So the ♣8 is either a singleton or the top of a doubleton. If partner's ♣8 is a singleton, there's nothing you can do. Declarer will have four clubs headed by the ♣Q-J. What if partner's ♣8 is the top of a doubleton? Is there anything you can do?

You can let declarer win the first trick!

You can overtake with an encouraging ♣10, letting declarer win the trick with the ♣J. Hopefully, you have left partner with a second club in case partner can gain the lead.

Even with the club trick, declarer does not have nine immediate winners. Declarer needs to promote winners in the heart suit. Declarer leads the ♥Q and your partner wins the ♥A.

Now you'll find out whether partner has another club remaining. Partner does have another club, the ♣2, and leads it, trusting your double even though declarer won the first trick with the ♣J. You win this trick with the ♣K as declarer follows with a low club. When you play the ♣A, declarer's only remaining high club, the ♣Q, falls. Partner discards a diamond. With no remaining clubs in the other three hands, both your remaining clubs are winners. You take a trick with the ♣9. The ♣7 is the fifth winner for the defense.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but you have defeated the 3NT contract. Your side got one heart and four club tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 843<br>♥ A96<br>♦ QT432<br>♣ 82</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q92<br>♥ KQ2<br>♦ AK75<br>♣ QJ6</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AKJT<br>♥ JT43<br>♦ 86<br>♣ 543</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 765<br>♥ 875<br>♦ J9<br>♣ AKT97</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

To defeat this contract, you have to do two things. The first is to make a lead-directing double of East's artificial 2♣ bid. Stayman is a very useful convention, but it does give the opponents an opportunity to double. If you keep quiet on this auction, partner will lead the ♦3, fourth best, and declarer will have an easy time making ten tricks. Once you get partner off to the best lead, you still need to defend carefully. Third hand high is a useful guideline, but it's only a guideline. Sometimes, you need to allow declarer to win a trick so you can keep communications open with partner.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/30)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/28)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/30#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.