---
prev:
  text: '2025-01-30'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/01/30'

next:
  text: '2025-02-01'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/02/01'
---

# 2025-01-31

On this deal, can you find the clues to avoid a 50% guess?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 32<br>♥ AQT86<br>♦ KQ6<br>♣ A64</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Both sides are vulnerable and you are South. West is the dealer and passes. Your partner, North, also passes, and so does East. You have to decide what call to make in fourth position.

You have a balanced hand with 15 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. Although some might open 1♥ with the five-card major, 1NT is a better description of the hand and will tend to simplify the rest of the auction.

West passes, and partner responds 2♣, the Stayman convention, asking whether you have a four-card major. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

You can now bid your major. Partner doesn't know you have five hearts, but you are showing a four-card or longer major.

West passes, and partner raises to 4♥. East passes, and you have another chance to make a call.

Having described the hand, you have nothing more to say now that partner has chosen to play game in hearts.

West passes, ending the auction. You are now the declarer in 4♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣A, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J54<br>♥ J975<br>♦ A8<br>♣ KJ52</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 32<br>♥ AQT86<br>♦ KQ6<br>♣ A64</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In 4♥, you start your plan by considering the potential losers you have. There is one potential heart loser since you are missing the ♥K. There are two spade losers which you are likely to lose right away since West has led the ♠A. There are no diamond losers since you have the top three cards, but there is a potential club loser since you are missing the ♣Q. That's a total of four possible losers: a heart, two spades, and a club. You need to eliminate one of them.

You can't avoid the two spade losers if the opponents take them right away.

In hearts, you can hope to avoid the loser with the help of a finesse, leading hearts from dummy and hoping East holds the ♥K. That's a 50% chance.

Since there are only seven combined clubs, the guideline eight ever, nine never tells you that trying the club finesse for the missing ♣Q is better than playing the ♣A-K and hoping the ♣Q will fall. Again, this appears to be a 50-50 proposition.

It looks as though your plan should be to try both the 50% heart finesse and the 50% club finesse. That gives you an overall chance of about 75% to make the contract. Is there any information that might impact the odds?

You can get some initial clues by analyzing the opening lead and reviewing the auction.

West has led the ♠A. Which defender holds the ♠K?

Presumably West. Defenders don't like to lead unsupported aces unless they have no other choice. With three "unbid" suits, West likely had alternatives holding only the without the ♠K.

Was there any information from the auction?

There doesn't appear to be much since both opponents were silent throughout.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠A. You play a low card from dummy, East makes an encouraging attitude signal by playing the ♠10, and you follow with a low spade. West continues with the ♠K, winning the second trick. East plays the ♠8, finishing the encouraging high-low signal. West leads a third round of spades. East covers dummy's ♠J with the ♠Q. and you ruff with a low heart. What next?

There's no need to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. Since you are planning to take the heart finesse as one of your chances, you need to start hearts from the dummy. You can get there with the ♦A. You want to remain in dummy so you can repeat the heart finesse if it works. In this situation, the best card to lead is the ♥9 on the first round. If the finesse works, you are still in the North hand to continue with the ♥J. You can even lead a third round of hearts from dummy if necessary. Unfortunately, the finesse loses to West's ♥K. You've now lost three tricks and can't afford to lose any more.

West leads back the ♦J, and you win in your hand. You finish drawing the defenders' trumps by playing the ♥A as both defenders follow. That takes care of the trumps. At least West didn't start with a singleton ♥K.

It's time to turn your attention to the club suit. You've already determined the best way to play the clubs is to take the ♣A and then lead toward dummy, finessing the if West follows with a low club. Let's see how that will work on this deal.

You win the ♣A. When you next lead a low club and West plays the you play dummy's ♣Q. However, that loses to East's ♣Q.

You can claim the rest of the tricks, but that's not good enough. You've lost four tricks with two spades, a heart, and a club. 4♥ is down one.

With both the ♥K and ♣Q in unfavorable positions, was there something you could have done?

Let's look again.

## Recommended Play

West wins the first trick with the ♣A. West wins the second trick with the ♠K. When West continues with another spade, you ruff the trick. You cross to dummy's ♦A so you can be in the right position to take a finesse in the trump suit. You start with dummy's ♥9, but West produces the ♥K, winning a third trick for the defense. West returns a diamond, and you win with the ♦Q. You finish drawing the defenders' trumps with the ♥A.

You have to tackle the club suit and can't afford to lose any more tricks. Even though this layout of the cards suggests finessing against a hoped-for in West, with what you now "know," is this still the best plan on this deal?

Before making a crucial play for the contract, lees go back and revisit the clues that you have picked up along the way. Start by reviewing the bidding. What did you learn from the auction?

Since the opponents passed throughout, you may think there is no information. However, both opponents had the chance to open the bidding and neither did so. What does that tell you?

Neither had as many as 13 points to open the bidding.

What do you know about the opponents' high cards so far?

West has shown up with the ♠A-K and also the ♥K and ♦J. East has shown up with only the ♠Q. Which defender holds the ♣Q?

East!

West has already shown up with 11 high-card points. If West also holds the ♣Q, that would give West 13 high-card points and West would presumably have opened the bidding.

Is there anything you can do if East holds the ♣Q?

There is no point taking a finesse that you know is going to lose. Although it is against the odds that the ♣Q will fall after two rounds, it is the only chance. Leading the ♣J from the dummy isn't a viable option since East can cover an honor with an honor and you would still have to lose a trick to the ♣10.

You lead the ♣A, and both defenders follow with low clubs. You lead a low club and, when West follows with a low club, you play dummy's ♣K. You are rewarded for all your detective work when the ♣Q falls from East. East started with a doubleton ♣Q.

You have the rest of the tricks, making the 4♥ contract. You lost two spades and a heart, but no club tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J54<br>♥ J975<br>♦ A8<br>♣ KJ52</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK76<br>♥ K4<br>♦ JT9<br>♣ T873</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QT98<br>♥ 32<br>♦ 75432<br>♣ Q9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 32<br>♥ AQT86<br>♦ KQ6<br>♣ A64</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

An opponent's pass can sometimes be as informative as a bid. When planning the play, don't forget to review the bidding. It might not give you any important clues right away but, as the play progresses, mentally check back now and then.

One of the first skills to becoming a better declarer is remembering the cards that have been played, particularly the honor cards - aces, kings, queens, and jacks. As this becomes more second nature, also take note of which defender showed up with each high card. You are trying to build a picture of the whole deal that matches the defenders' bidding and play.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/01/31)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/01/27)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/01)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/01)

### By Date

Use the links below.