---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-30'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/30'

next:
  text: '2024-10-02'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/02'
---

# 2024-10-01

In today's deal, can you promote a winner in partner's hand?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKQJ63<br>♥ 8<br>♦ T98<br>♣ QJ5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make in first position.

There are 13 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit. That's enough to open the bidding at the one level in the six-card major.

West makes a takeout double. Partner, North, passes. East advances to 2♥. The auction is back to you.

With a solid six-card spade suit, you might rebid 2♠. However, partner will expect more than a bare minimum opening bid. So let's go with a cautious pass.

West raises to 3♥, showing a hand stronger than a minimum takeout double, about 17 or more points, inviting game. Partner passes again, and East accepts the invitation by continuing to 4♥. You have another chance to make a call.

Naturally, you pass.

West and partner also pass, ending the auction. You now have to choose an opening lead against East's 4♥ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>X</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

With a suit headed by the ace-king-queen, there's little reason to look elsewhere for a suitable opening lead.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♠A, top of the solid sequence, and dummy comes down.

Note: Some partnerships agree to lead the queen from a suit headed by the ace-king-queen.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 842<br>♥ AKQ6<br>♦ AJ43<br>♣ K3</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQJ63<br>♥ 8<br>♦ T98<br>♣ QJ5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays a low spade from dummy, partner plays the ♠9, and declarer follows suit with the ♠5. You've won the first trick. What are you going to do next?

Partner's ♠9 must be either a singleton or top of a doubleton. In either case, declarer still has at least one spade remaining, so it seems best to continue the suit before declarer has an opportunity to discard any spade losers.

You continue with the ♠K. Another low spade is played from dummy, and partner shows out, discarding a low club. Declarer follows with the ♠7. You've won the second trick. Now what?

Since partner started with only one spade, declarer must have started with three and still has one left. You might as well take your third spade winner.

You continue with the ♠Q. The last spade is played from dummy, partner discards a low diamond, and declarer follows with the ♠10. You've won the first three tricks. You are now at the critical point in the defense. What are you leading at trick four?

You need one more trick to defeat the contract. It seems reasonable to switch to the ♣Q, hoping to trap dummy's ♣K if partner holds the ♣A. That would defeat the contract. Let's see what will happen when you do lead the ♣Q.

Suppose you lead the ♣Q. Dummy's is played and wins the trick, as partner an declarer follow with low clubs. Declarer draws trumps with dummy's ♥A. Declarer continues with dummy's ♥K. Partner follows suit and you discard a spade. A third round of trumps is played with dummy's ♥Q, felling partner's ♥J. Next, a low diamond is led from dummy to declarer's ♦K. Declarer then crosses to dummy's ♦A. On the third round of diamonds, declarer ruffs your partner's ♦Q. Declarer takes a trick with the ♣A and ruffs a low club with dummy's remaining trump.

Declarer still has another trump remaining in hand, making the
4♥ contract. Declarer lost only the first three spade tricks.

Since it appears your partner had no high cards at all, perhaps there was nothing your side could do to defeat the contract.

Or was there?

Let's go back and take another look.

## Recommended Defense

You win the first trick with the ♠A. Since you still have the ♠K-Q-J, it's reasonable to continue with the ♠K. Partner shows out on this trick, discarding a low club. You started with six spades, dummy had three, and partner had one, so you tow know declarer started with three spades. You take your remaining spade winner with the ♠Q as partner discards a low diamond. What next?

You need one more trick to defeat the contract. It wouldn't be a problem if partner holds the ♣A. You could lead the ♣Q, trapping dummy's ♣K. Your side could gain two tricks. However, is it possible for partner to hold the ♣A?

No!

Not only is it unlikely given partner's silence during the auction and East's acceptance of the game invitation, partner has already denied holding the ♣A. Partner's first discard was the ♣2. Partner would not make a discouraging signal in clubs when holding the ♣A with the ♣K in dummy. So a club doesn't look as though it will get your side a trick, even though it won't give away a trick.

How about a diamond? Could partner hold the ♦K?

Even if partner holds the ♦Q, perhaps it won't hurt to lead the ♦10, trapping dummy's ♦J.

No!

Holding the ♦K, partner would either have made an encouraging attitude signal in diamonds or simply discarded another club. With a choice of discards, partner chose the ♦2, a discouraging signal in diamonds.

If partner doesn't have any interest in clubs or diamonds, what could partner want you to do?

Lead another spade!

But both dummy and declarer are out of spades. Won't leading another spade give declarer a ruff and a sluff, allowing declarer to ruff in one hand and discard a loser from the other hand?

Yes... but it doesn't matter!

Partner's signals have already told you that you don't have any tricks coming in either clubs or diamonds. So giving declarer a ruff and a sluff won't help declarer. Declarer has no losers to discard.

Could it help your side?

Let's see.

Having determined that it can't hurt, you lead a fourth round of spades, the ♠J. Declarer ruffs with dummy's ♥Q. Partner discards a club, and so does declarer. However, you know discarding a club doesn't help declarer. Declarer could have ruffed a club loser in dummy or perhaps discarded it on an extra diamond winner.

Declarer leads the ♥A, starting to draw trumps. Partner follows with a low heart, and so do you. Declarer continues with the ♥K. Partner again follows with a low heart, but you show out, discarding a spade.

Declarer looks annoyed. To see why, let's look at the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ J<br>♦ Q75<br>♣ T94</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ 6<br>♦ AJ43<br>♣ K3</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ T97<br>♦ K6<br>♣ A8</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ <br>♦ T98<br>♣ QJ5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner's ♥J has become the highest remaining trump!

Declarer has the rest of the tricks but, sooner or later, partner will get a trick with the ♥J. 4♥ is going down one. Your side got three spade tricks and a heart trick.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 9<br>♥ J42<br>♦ Q752<br>♣ T9742</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 842<br>♥ AKQ6<br>♦ AJ43<br>♣ K3</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T75<br>♥ T9753<br>♦ K6<br>♣ A86</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQJ63<br>♥ 8<br>♦ T98<br>♣ QJ5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner, with the weakest hand at the table, was able to help you find the winning defense on this deal. Looking at the dummy, partner can see that a fourth round of spades from you will promote the ♥J into a winner. How can partner send you this message?

Partner starts by making a discouraging attitude signal in clubs, showing no interest in that suit. Then partner makes the key play of making a discouraging signal in diamonds, despite holding the ♦Q. Partner is saying, "Don't lead a club on my account... and don't lead a diamond either." Of course, if you held the ♣A, for example, you'd take a trick with it anyway, before doing anything else.

Once you get the message that partner has nothing of interest in clubs or diamonds, and you can see that you don't have any tricks there either, the only hope is that partner can get a trump trick.

If partner holds a natural trump trick such as ♥J-10-4-2, then it doesn't matter what you do. If partner doesn't have a sure trump trick, perhaps you can help create one by leading a fourth round of spades. Declarer can't do anything when you lead the fourth round of spades. If declarer ruffs with dummy's low heart or discards from dummy, partner can ruff with the ♥J, winning the trick. Declarer's best hope is to ruff with one of dummy's high hearts, hoping the missing hearts are divided 2-2 or there is a singleton ♥J. No such luck for declarer on this deal.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/01)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/24)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/01#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.