---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-02'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/02'

next: false
---

# 2024-10-03

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK<br>♥ A53<br>♦ AQ95<br>♣ 8754</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

You have a balanced hand with 17 high-card points. That's an ideal hand for a 1NT opening bid when the partnership range is 15-17 points.

West passes, and partner, North, responds 2♣. East passes, and you have to choose a rebid.

Partner's 2♣ bid is the Stayman convention, asking whether you have a four-card or longer major suit. With no major suit, you make the artificial reply of 2♦.

West passes, and partner jumps to 3NT. After East passes, you have another chance to make a call.

Partner's 3NT rebid is a signoff bid. You've described the hand by opening 1NT and then showing no major suit. Based on that, partner has chosen to play game in notrump. You have no reason to override partner's decision. You pass.

West passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠4. Partner puts down the dummy, and you have to find nine tricks to make the contract.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J9<br>♥ K762<br>♦ KJT4<br>♣ K96</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AK<br>♥ A53<br>♦ AQ95<br>♣ 8754</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In making a plan in notrump, start by counting the sure tricks. There are two spade winners, the ♠A and ♠K. There are two sure heart tricks. There are no sure club tricks since the defenders hold all the high clubs except for the ♣K. Finally, there are four sure diamond tricks, the ♦A, ♦K, ♦Q, and ♦J. That's a total of eight sure winners, two spades, two hearts, and four diamonds. You need to find only one more trick.

You aren't getting any more tricks from the spade or diamond suits.

In hearts, you can establish an extra winner through length by giving up a trick if the six missing hearts are divided exactly 3-3. The odds of a 3-3 division are about 36%.

In clubs, there is the opportunity to get a trick with the help of a finesse by leading toward the ♣K, hoping West holds the ♣A. That's a 50% chance. There's also the chance that the defenders' six clubs are divided 3-3 so your fourth club could become a winner.

So there appear to be chances for a ninth trick in both hearts and clubs. Are there any potential problems?

West has led a spade. Although you have two spade stoppers, one of the defenders must have at least five spades, so the defenders will have at least three spade winners to take if you have to give up the lead twice.

When there are two or more chances to develop the tricks you need, you want to combine the chances if possible. Is it possible to combine the chances in both hearts and clubs on this deal?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠4. You play low from dummy, East plays the ♠7, and you win the ♠K. Before playing either hearts or clubs, there is no harm in taking the diamond winners. Perhaps the opponents will provide some help through their discards. Both defenders follow to the ♦A. Both defenders also follow to the ♦Q. On the third round of diamonds, West follows but East shows out, discarding a spade. On the last diamond, East discards another spade and West discards a low club. You come to your hand with the ♥A. Both defenders follow suit. You are now at the critical point in the play. Should you lead a club or give up a heart trick?

Leading a club seems riskier. If East holds the ♣A, you will lose more than one club trick. So let's see what happens if you choose to give up a heart, hoping the defenders' hearts were originally divided 3-3.

Suppose you lead a heart and, when West follows, you play a low heart from dummy. You want to keep the ♥K as an entry to dummy's hoped-for heart winner. West wins the trick.

West leads another spade, and you win with your last spade stopper. Since the defenders' spades are now established, it's too late to try the club finesse. Even if West holds the ♣A, the defenders will have enough winners to defeat the contract.

Your only chance is to hope the hearts are divided favorably. You lead a heart, but West shows out. All you can do is win the ♥K.

The defenders have the rest of the tricks and 3NT is down one. Hoping for a 3-3 heart break didn't work, and you couldn't get a second chance with the clubs.

Let's return to the deal and try again.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♠4, and you win the trick with the ♠K. You play four rounds of diamonds, starting with the ♦A, ♦Q, and then a diamond to dummy's ♦J and ♦K. You cross back to your hand with the ♥A.

At this point, you must decide whether to hope the missing hearts were originally divided 3-3 or West holds the ♣A. Although it looks riskier to lead a club, you should go with the play that offers the better odds. The 3-3 heart break is only 36%; the club finesse is 50%. Go with the odds.

You lead a low club toward dummy. West follows with the ♣J. Are you still going with the odds?

You should. The odds haven't changed. You play the ♣K and it wins. The 50% chance has come through. The ♥K is your eighth trick. The ♠A is trick number nine.

The opponents have the rest of the tricks, but you've made the 3NT contract. You took two spades, two hearts, four diamonds, and one club.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J9<br>♥ K762<br>♦ KJT4<br>♣ K96</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT843<br>♥ T8<br>♦ 763<br>♣ AJ2</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 7652<br>♥ QJ94<br>♦ 82<br>♣ QT3</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AK<br>♥ A53<br>♦ AQ95<br>♣ 8754</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When you need one or more extra winners as declarer, you go through declarer's checklist and look at the possibilities in each suit. Having done that, you ideally want to combine as many of the chances as possible, which often involves taking the chances in the correct order. However, when you only have the "time" to give yourself one chance in the play, take the one that offers the best odds.

On this deal, you have to choose between the 36% heart chance and the 50% club finesse. Guess which one you should take!

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/03)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/30)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/03#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.