---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-03'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/03'

next:
  text: '2024-10-05'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/05'
---

# 2024-10-04

On this deal, are you using all the information you have to formulate a plan?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKJ862<br>♥ 53<br>♦ A64<br>♣ K9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. You have to decide what call to make in first chair.

You have 15 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit. With two doubletons, the hand is only semi-balanced. You would simply start with the six-card major.

West makes a preemptive jump overcall of 3♥. Partner, North, competes with 3♠, and East passes. You have to decide what call to make after this start.

Partner's 3♠ bid in a competitive auction has a fairly wide range. Partner might have stretched to compete with only about 8 or 9 points. Partner might also have an invitational hand of about 10-12 points. With 13 or more points, partner would make sure the partnership reaches game. Whatever partner's strength, you have enough extra for the opening bid to go for the game bonus.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥A, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QT75<br>♥ K872<br>♦ Q75<br>♣ A8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ862<br>♥ 53<br>♦ A64<br>♣ K9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 11 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton club, a limit raise.

Your focus is on taking ten tricks, and you start by considering the potential losers. How many are there?

There are no losers in the trump suit. You have all the top spades. You start with two potential heart losers. However, West has led the ♥A, so dummy's ♥K is now a winner. There are no club losers, but you have two potential diamond losers since the opponents have the ♦K-J-10-9. So it appears you have only three losers, a heart and two diamonds. That's okay. Can anything go wrong?

Yes! West has made a preemptive jump overcall of 3♥ during the auction. How many hearts is East likely to hold?

Zero or one.

Typically, a preemptive jump overcall to the three level shows a seven-card suit. Since you have two hearts and dummy has four, that would leave East with none. If West has made a jump overcall with a six-card suit, taking advantage of the favorable vulnerability, East will have a singleton heart.

So the auction warns you that you are in danger of losing two heart
tricks. If you do lose two hearts, is there any way to avoid two diamond losers?

You could plan to take a finesse by leading toward dummy's ♦Q, hoping West holds the ♦K. That's usually a 50% chance. What are the odds on this deal?

Less than 50%.

West made a preemptive bid during the auction and has already shown up with the ♥A. That reduces the odds that West also holds the ♦K.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥A. You play low from dummy, East follows with the ♥9, and you follow with a low heart. What do you know already?

Since East followed suit, West must have started with only a six-card heart suit.

West continues with the ♥Q. You are at the critical point in the play. What are you playing to this trick?

If you play low, West's ♥Q will win the trick. So it seems natural to play the ♥K. Let's see what will happen if you do.

Suppose you play the ♥K from dummy. As you expected, East ruffs this trick. The defenders have taken the first two tricks. East leads a club, and dummy's ♣A wins the trick.

There's no reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. You play the ♠K and both defenders follow suit. That takes care of the missing trumps.

You might take the time to ruff dummy's hearts in your hand and take the remaining club winner in case a defender has to give you a ruff and a sluff. However, your basic chance is that West holds the ♦K. So let's assume you take the ♦A. You lead a low diamond toward dummy and try the ♦Q. As you feared, however, East wins the ♦K.

East takes a trick with the ♦J, and the 4♠ contract is down one.

It's a little unfortunate that the defenders were able to ruff your heart winner and that the ♦K was unfavorably placed.

Could you have done anything about it?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Play

When West leads the ♥A and East follows suit, you have all the clues you need to help make the contract. The auction has warned you that West holds a six-card or longer heart suit, so you "know" East has no hearts remaining after this trick. West continues with the ♥Q at trick two. How can you put your knowledge to use?

You play low from dummy, letting West's ♥Q win the trick!

You know you're going to lose the trick anyway, so why waste dummy's ♥K?

As you expected, East shows out on this trick, discarding a diamond. West continues with the ♥J. What are you playing to this trick?

Again, you play a low heart from dummy. You want to hold on to the ♥K now that it's a winner. East discards again, and you ruff to win this trick.

Next, you draw the defenders' trumps. Both defenders follow to the first round. There is only one trump outstanding. You draw the remaining trump. You cross over to dummy with the ♣A. Now you can safely take dummy's carefully preserved ♥K and discard one of your diamond losers.

You still have a diamond to lose, but that's all. You've made the 4♠ contract, losing only two hearts and one diamond.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QT75<br>♥ K872<br>♦ Q75<br>♣ A8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 4<br>♥ AQJT64<br>♦ T82<br>♣ JT7</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 93<br>♥ 9<br>♦ KJ93<br>♣ Q65432</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ862<br>♥ 53<br>♦ A64<br>♣ K9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When the opponents interfere in the auction, it can take away valuable bidding space and sometimes propel you into the wrong contract. At the same time, however, the opponents' bidding gives you information about the lie of the unseen cards. That can often prove useful during the play.

On this deal, suppose West didn't bid and you arrived in 4♠. If West then led the ♥A followed by the ♥Q, you would have no idea that West had six hearts. You might unsuspectingly play the ♥K and be surprised when it got ruffed. You would then have to rely on the diamond finesse. West's preemptive jump overcall of 3♥ gives you a warning about how the defenders' hearts are dividing. You can then formulate a plan to do something about it.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/04)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/03)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/07)

### By Date

Use the links below.