---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-06'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/06'

next:
  text: '2024-10-08'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/08'
---

# 2024-10-07

In this column, is drawing trump the priority?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J53<br>♥ KQJ872<br>♦ 9<br>♣ A54</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East and West are vulnerable and your side is not. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♦. East passes. You must select a response.

With 11 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit, there should be enough combined strength for at least game when partner has enough to open the bidding at the one level. The priority, however, is to first determine Where the partnership belongs. You start by responding at the one level in the six-card major suit.

West passes. North rebids 1NT, and East passes. You have an opportunity to make a second call.

Partner has shown a minimum-strength balanced hand of about 12-14 points. Since partner should have at least two hearts, you've now found an eight-card or longer major-suit fit. With the answers to both How High and Where, you can take the partnership to game in 4♥.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣10. Dummy comes down with a doubleton heart, 12 high-card points, and a balanced hand.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T86<br>♥ T4<br>♦ AQ73<br>♣ KQJ2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J53<br>♥ KQJ872<br>♦ 9<br>♣ A54</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In 4♥, you can afford to lose only three tricks. In a suit contract, begin by counting the potential losers. There is a sure heart loser since the opponents hold the ♥A. There are three potential spade losers since the opponents hold the ♠A-K-Q. There are no diamond losers since dummy's ♦A will take care of the singleton diamond in your hand. There are no club losers since you hold the four top honors in the suit. That's a total of four potential losers: one heart and three spades. ou can afford only three losers so one loser will need to be eliminated to make the contract.

You can't do anything about the heart loser.

A spade loser can be discarded on the fourth round of clubs once trumps have been drawn. Is that a good enough plan?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣10. Suppose you win the first trick with dummy's ♣J as East follows with a low club.

Since you can't take the club winners until trumps are drawn, suppose you start by leading the ♥10 from dummy, high card from the short side. East follows with a low heart and West wins the ♥A. You've promoted your remaining hearts into winners and can draw the rest of the defenders' trumps on regaining the lead.

Unfortunately, West shifts to a low spade. East wins the ♠K. East continues with the ♠A, winning the third trick for the defense. East leads another spade, and West wins the ♠Q. That's the fourth trick for the defense. West leads a club and you win the ♣A.

You can draw the rest of the trumps, which takes two rounds. With trumps drawn, it is now safe to take the remaining club winners, but it's too late to discard a spade.

You have the rest of the tricks, but the contract is down one.

It was unlucky the defenders switched to spades on gaining the lead and were able to take three tricks.

Should you have tackled the hand differently?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣10.

Although drawing trumps is usually a priority, you have to consider whether it may be more important to delay drawing trumps when you have other priorities.

On this deal, if you let the defenders gain the lead with their ♥A, they may take their three spade winners. You can't discard a spade loser on a club until trumps are drawn, but do you have any other option?

Yes. You may be able to discard a spade loser on an extra diamond winner in dummy.

There is no extra diamond winner in dummy, but you may be able to create one with the help of a finesse. This risks going down an extra trick if the finesse loses, but it is the only legitimate chance to make the contract.

Since you need to be in your hand to try the diamond finesse, you win the first trick with the ♣A as East follows with a low club. No time to lose. You immediately lead the singleton diamond and, when West plays low, you finesse dummy's ♦Q. You didn't have a diamond loser to start with and this will create one if East holds the ♦K.

The risk you took is rewarded when East follows with a low diamond. West must hold the ♦K. You can discard a spade loser on dummy's ♦A. Now it is safe to start drawing trumps. You lead the ♥10 from dummy, starting with the high card from the short side. East follows with a low heart as West wins the ♥A.

West switches to a spade, but it's too late for the defense. East wins the ♠K. East takes another trick with the ♠A. When East leads a third round of spades, however, you can ruff, having discarded one of the spade losers.

You can now draw the defenders' remaining trumps, which takes two rounds. With trumps drawn, you can now safely take the club winners.

You have the last two tricks with the remaining trumps. You've made the contract losing one heart and only two spade tricks.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T86<br>♥ T4<br>♦ AQ73<br>♣ KQJ2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q94<br>♥ A6<br>♦ KJ64<br>♣ T987</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AK72<br>♥ 953<br>♦ T852<br>♣ 63</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J53<br>♥ KQJ872<br>♦ 9<br>♣ A54</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When assessing the losers, it's important to consider whether they are quick or slow. Quick losers are those the opponents can take immediately on gaining the lead. Slow losers are those that may be lost if you don't do something about them but won't be lost right away when the opponents gain the lead.

On this deal, you have four losers and they are all quick. As soon as the defenders gain the lead, they can take their three spade winners to go with the ♥A. So you have to delay drawing trumps while you see if you can eliminate one of the spade losers. The only way to do that is with the help of the diamond finesse - a 50% chance. A 50% chance is better than no chance and is usually worth the risk. The score for down two isn't much worse than the score for down one.

On this deal, you were fortunate West didn't find a spade lead initially, which would have given you no chance.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/07)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/04)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/07#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.