---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-07'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/07'

next:
  text: '2024-10-09'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/09'
---

# 2024-10-08

In today's deal, you have an opportunity to defeat the contract by a large margin. What should you do?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A53<br>♥ KJT82<br>♦ A74<br>♣ 85</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. With neither side is vulnerable, you have to choose what call to make in first position.

You have 12 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. That's enough to open the bidding. Although the hand is balanced, it is too weak to open 1NT. Instead, you start with the five-card major.

West passes. Partner, North, also passes. Partner would presumably have responded with 6 or more points. So partner has 0-5 points. East is in the balancing position. If East passes, the auction is over. East makes a takeout double, and the auction is back to you.

You have a minimum balanced hand and partner has fewer than 6 points. There's no reason to get further involved in the auction.

West advances 1NT, showing about 7-11 points and at least one heart stopper. Partner passes, and East makes an invitational raise to 2NT, showing about 15-18 points, too strong to balance 1NT. It's your turn to make a call.

You still have no reason to compete further in the auction. You've already shown your opening bid.

West accepts the invitation by continuing to 3NT. Partner and East both pass. You have one more opportunity to make a call.

Naturally, you pass and await partner's lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♥5 and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KQ7<br>♥ Q96<br>♦ JT2<br>♣ AKQ3</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A53<br>♥ KJT82<br>♦ A74<br>♣ 85</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

East has 17 high-card points. In the direct position, East might have overcalled 1NT to show about 15-18 points. In the balancing position, however, 1NT would show only about 11-14 points. With more than that, East had to start with a takeout double.

One advantage of bidding during the auction is that it will help partner know what to lead if the opponents buy the contract. Here, partner has led the suit you opened, hearts. The ♥6 is played from dummy. What are you playing to this trick?

Since West bid notrump, West presumably holds the ♥A. Partner is presumably leading the top of a doubleton, or perhaps a singleton. The general guideline is third hand high, but that is modified when you have cards ranking both above and below dummy's card. You need only play as high as necessary, and here the ♥8 is enough to force declarer to win with the ♥A if declarer wants to win the trick.

Declarer chooses to win the ♥A. That's good. You have dummy's ♥Q trapped if partner can gain the lead and has another heart to lead. Declarer leads a low club to dummy's ♣A as both you and partner follow with low clubs. Declarer then leads the ♦J from dummy. You are at the critical point in the defense. What are you playing to this trick?

It looks as though declarer is trying a finesse in diamonds. You'd like partner to win a trick and then lead another heart, trapping dummy's ♥Q. You'd then be able to take four heart tricks to go with your two aces and partner's diamond trick. Down three!

So let's see what will happen if you play low. Suppose you follow with a low diamond. That's consistent with the guideline of second hand low. Unfortunately, dummy's ♦J wins the trick. So much for your hope that partner has a diamond winner. Next, declarer switches to spades, leading dummy's ♠K. You have another decision. What are you playing to this trick?

There's not much point in holding up winning the ♠A. Declarer has lots of club entries to dummy and one or more diamond entries to the West hand. You might as well win the ♠A. After all, "aces are meant to take kings." Declarer and partner follow low. What now?

You still have the ♦A, so perhaps it is not too late to establish the hearts yourself since it doesn't look as though partner is going to gain the lead. Suppose you play the ♥K. Declarer, partner, and dummy all follow with low hearts. You lead another heart to force out dummy's ♥Q. Declarer follows, but partner shows out, discarding a diamond. Your remaining two hearts are now established as winners, and you still have the ♦A.

Declarer now takes dummy's ♣Q, ♣K, and a trick with the ♣10. You follow to the first club and then discard a diamond and a spade. Declarer takes a trick with dummy's ♠Q as you follow suit. Sadly, declarer has another trick with the ♠J and you have to discard one of the established heart winners.

You have the last two tricks, but declarer has made the 3NT contract. Declarer got four club tricks, two heart tricks, two spade tricks, and one diamond.

Perhaps you could have avoided giving declarer a second heart trick, but then declarer could establish a second diamond trick instead.

Was there anything you could have done?

Let's go back.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♥5, and your ♥8 forces out declarer's ♥A. Declarer crosses to dummy with a club. Declarer then leads the ♦J from dummy.

Before automatically playing second hand low, you need to carefully consider the situation. Is it likely that partner holds the ♦Q?

You have 12 high-card points and dummy started with 17 high-card points. West showed 7-11 points with the 1NT advance and presumably has the upper range of about 9-11 to accept East's invitation. That leaves at most 1 or 2 points for partner. Partner could hold the ♦Q, but it's doubtful.

If you win the ♦A and partner does hold the ♦Q, declarer will get only one diamond trick with the ♦K before your side regains the lead. And if you win the ♦A right away, you can establish your heart suit and still have the ♠A as an entry. Unless declarer holds four or more diamonds headed by the ♦K-Q, declarer won't have enough tricks to make the contract. And if declarer has that holding, then there's no point playing a low diamond anyway.

So you should win the ♦A right away!

Declarer and partner follow with low diamonds.

Now you want to establish your hearts while you still have the ♠A to regain the lead. You take a trick with the ♥K as everyone follows with low hearts. It doesn't matter which of your remaining hearts you use to drive out the ♥Q, so you might as well use your highest-ranking heart, the ♥J. That sends a suit preference signal to partner that your entry is in the highest-ranking suit, spades. Declarer follows with a low heart and partner can comfortably discard a spade as dummy's ♥Q wins the trick.

Next, declarer leads a low spade from dummy. You have another decision. What are you playing to this trick?

You must immediately win the ♠A!

You have the established tricks you need and you don't want declarer to sneak through a spade trick and make the contract.

Declarer and partner follow with low spades.

Having regained the lead, you take your established ♥10. You take another trick with the ♥2. That's your fifth trick.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but you have defeated the 3NT contract. You got both your aces and three heart tricks.

## The Rest of the Story

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T864<br>♥ 53<br>♦ 9863<br>♣ J92</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J92<br>♥ A74<br>♦ KQ5<br>♣ T764</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KQ7<br>♥ Q96<br>♦ JT2<br>♣ AKQ3</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A53<br>♥ KJT82<br>♦ A74<br>♣ 85</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer played the hand craftily. Declarer started with four club winners and one heart winner. If you continue hearts, declarer will have a second heart winner. So declarer needs three winners from spades and diamonds. If declarer can sneak a trick through in one of the suits, then declarer can promote two winners in the other suit.

If declarer had led a spade to one of dummy's high spades at trick two, it would be easy for you to win the and establish the hearts before declarer could get a diamond trick. It would be the same thing if declarer led the ♦K or ♦Q at trick two. It would also be easy to win the ♦A and establish the hearts while still holding the ♠A. So declarer crossed to dummy with a club and led the ♦J, hoping you would play low. Then declarer could go after the spades.

Even if you do win the ♦A and establish the hearts, declarer can still try one more deception by leading a low spade from dummy rather than a high spade. If you were to play low, declarer would win the and again have nine tricks. You needed to take both your aces right away to defeat the contract.

While it might be nice to imagine partner winning a trick with the ♦Q and leading a second heart to defeat the contract, it would not be a good play in this situation. First, you need only five tricks to defeat the contract, not seven. Second, even if partner happened to hold the ♦Q, partner might have started with a singleton heart and not have another heart to lead.

Ironically, it would have been easier to find the best defense if you had a weaker heart holding of ♥Q-J-10-8-2. Then you wouldn't have been so anxious for partner to get the lead. You would win the first diamond and drive out declarer's remaining high heart while still holding the ♠A.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/05)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/01)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/05#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.