---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-09'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/09'

next:
  text: '2024-10-11'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/11'
---

# 2024-10-10

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K4<br>♥ AKQJ87<br>♦ T3<br>♣ AKJ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

There are 21 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit. That's too strong for a non-forcing one-level bid. Instead, you open with a strong artificial 2♣.

West passes, and partner, North, replies 2♦, which the partnership plays as an artificial waiting bid. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

You can now show the heart suit. There's no need to jump since a suit rebid is forcing after a 2♣ opening.

West passes, and partner bids 2NT. The partnership agreement is that 3♣ here would be artificial and shows a very weak hand, cheaper minor negative. So 2NT shows a little something - a king or more - and commits the partnership to at least game. East passes, and it's your turn to make a call.

With six heart tricks and two club tricks, you might raise to 3NT, hoping partner has enough in spades and diamonds to prevent the defenders from taking the first five tricks and that partner can also provide a ninth trick. The other choice is to rebid the heart suit to show a six-card or longer suit. After partner's 2NT rebid, 3♥ is forcing, so let's go with that. You can still stop in 3NT if partner really doesn't like hearts.

West passes, and partner raises to 4♥. East passes, and you have another call.

Partner has shown a little something but would have raised to 3♥ immediately with a good hand for hearts or made a stronger move over 3♥. Game should be high enough, especially since you don't have anything extra for the 2♣ opening. You pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦K, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 976<br>♥ 432<br>♦ AJ62<br>♣ 954</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K4<br>♥ AKQJ87<br>♦ T3<br>♣ AKJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Despite holding an ace, partner didn't feel the hand was good enough to raise hearts right away, with weak hearts and no short suits to ruff. You certainly don't want to be any higher.

You start your plan by considering the potential losers. The hearts are solid with no losers there. There are two potential spade losers since the opponents hold all the high spades other than the ♠K. Partner's ♦A will take care of one of the diamonds in your hand, but you will still be left with a diamond loser. There is also a potential club loser since you are missing the ♣Q. So that's four potential losers. You need to eliminate one of them.

If East holds the ♠A, you can avoid a spade loser with the help of a finesse by leading toward the ♠K. That's a 50% chance.

Similarly, if East holds the ♣Q, you can avoid the club loser with the help of a finesse by leading to the ♣J. That's another 50% chance.

That's two 50% chances. If you can try them both, that would improve the overall odds to 75%. Is it possible to combine the chances on this deal?

No. To try both finesses, you would need to lead twice from dummy. However, you have only one entry, the ♦A. It looks as though you will have to choose which finesse to take, bringing the odds back to 50%.

Are there any other possibilities?

There is the diamond suit. West has led the ♦K and, presumably, holds the ♦Q as well. If you win the ♦A, you could lead a diamond to your ♦10 to drive out the ♦Q and establish dummy's ♦J as a winner.

What's the problem with that plan?

If you win the first trick with the ♦A and lead another diamond, you won't be able to reach dummy's ♦J since your entry to dummy will be gone.

Is there anything you can do about that?

What if you hold up winning the ♦A on the first trick?

After drawing the defenders' trumps, you can lead your remaining diamond and finesse the ♦J. You can then discard either a spade or a club loser on dummy's ♦A.

That looks like a good idea. Let's see what will happen on the actual deal.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦K. Let's suppose you let West win this trick. Things appear to be set up the way you want. You are in a position to establish an extra diamond winner and West is still on lead. West can't lead a spade or a club without giving you a trick. West continues with a low diamond. Since you were planning to finesse the ♦J yourself later, you can do so now. As you expected, the ♦J wins the trick as East follows with another low diamond.

However, there's a small problem. Since you are in dummy for the last time, you need to take the ♦A right now, before drawing the defenders' trumps. Unfortunately, when you play the ♦A, East ruffs. East started with only a doubleton diamond.

You can overruff, but that wasn't the plan. Now the contract is in trouble. Not only did you lose the extra diamond winner, but you have now lost your entry to dummy. Even if East does hold the ♠A or ♣Q, you can no longer take either finesse. You will have to play both spades and clubs from your hand. That's no good. Unless there is a very lucky lie of the cards or the defenders make a mistake, the contract is going down one.

Perhaps you should have won the ♦A and simply guessed whether to take the spade finesse or club finesse. At least that's a 50% chance.

Or is there something better?

Let's go back and try again.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♦K.

Assuming West also holds the ♦Q, is there a way to guarantee the contract?

Yes! Win the ♦A.

As long as East doesn't ruff this, the contract is guaranteed if West has the ♦Q. Let's see. Having won the ♦A at trick one, your only entry to dummy, should you try the spade finesse or the club finesse?

Neither!

You can simply start drawing the defenders' trumps. Both defenders follow to the first round. Both defenders also follow to the second round of trumps. That takes care of all the defenders' trumps. If they had divided 3-1 or 4-0, you would continue until all the defenders' trumps are gone. Now what?

Lead the ♦10!

West wins the ♦Q, but what can West do now?

If West leads another diamond, you can win dummy's ♦J and discard one of your losers. Even better, you will get a chance to try one of the finesses for a possible overtrick. If West leads a spade, you are guaranteed to get a trick with the ♠K. And if West leads a club, you will get all three club tricks no matter which defender holds the ♣Q.

You will still have to lose two tricks, but you've made the contract. You lost only a diamond and two spades.

## Summary

Here is the full layout.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 976<br>♥ 432<br>♦ AJ62<br>♣ 954</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQT<br>♥ T5<br>♦ KQ987<br>♣ T76</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J8532<br>♥ 96<br>♦ 54<br>♣ Q832</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K4<br>♥ AKQJ87<br>♦ T3<br>♣ AKJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On the actual lie of the cards, you could win the ♦A and make the contract by guessing to take the club finesse rather than the spade finesse. But if West held the ♣Q and East the ♠A, then you would have had to guess to lead a spade. And if West held both the ♣Q and ♠A, you couldn't guess right. Holding the ♦A and planning to finesse the ♦J to get two tricks later is a good technique when dummy has no entry in a side suit. However, it doesn't work in this case if East holds a singleton or doubleton diamond.

Fortunately, on this deal, you have a better option, a much better one. After winning the ♦A and drawing trumps, you can endplay West with the ♦Q, leaving West with no winning play.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/10)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/07)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/11)

### By Date

Use the links below.