---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-10'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/10'

next:
  text: '2024-10-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/12'
---

# 2024-10-11

On this deal, the opening lead has given you helpful information. Can you use it wisely?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ962<br>♥ 53<br>♦ A83<br>♣ QT5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South and both sides are vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens 1♥. Your partner, North, passes, and so does East. You have to decide what call to make in the balancing position.

You have 11 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. That would be at best a borderline opening bid in first or second position, but it is more than enough to make an overcall in the balancing position. Partner must have some values and it's up to you to protect the partnership interest in the auction. Although you have support for both minors, the fifth spade makes the hand more suitable for an overcall than a takeout double.

West passes, and partner cuebids 2♥. East passes, and you have to choose a rebid.

Partner's cuebid shows a good hand and interest in reaching game. Partner presumably has some support for spades but may also be interested in whether you have a stopper in the opponent's heart suit, or a second suit, or extra values. You have more than you might have for a balancing overcall, but not enough to show any extra values at this point. If partner has only a mild game try, it will be best to stop in partscore.

West passes again, and partner raises to 3♠. East passes, and you have another decision to make.

Partner is giving you a further invitation to game. In light of your previous rejection, you have a pretty good hand. Nothing wasted in hearts and some values in both minor suits. You might pass, but let's go with accepting partner's invitation.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦10, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K75<br>♥ J94<br>♦ KQ5<br>♣ KJ73</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ962<br>♥ 53<br>♦ A83<br>♣ QT5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has bid a little aggressively but does have an opening bid.

In planning the play in a suit contract, start by counting the potential losers you have. How many are there in 4♠?

Even if the five spades are divided 3-2, you have a potential loser since you are missing the ♠Q. If the spades break 4-1 or 5-0, you could have more than one loser. In hearts, there are two sure losers. You are missing all the high hearts but can ruff the third round. You don't have any diamond losers, but there is a sure club loser, since you are missing the ♣A. So you have at least four potential losers: a spade, two hearts, and a club.

Since you can't do anything about the heart and club losers, you are going to have to avoid losing any spade tricks. With eight spades in the combined hands, the odds favor the spade finesse rather than playing the ♠A and ♠K, hoping the ♠Q will fall. The guideline in these situations is eight ever, nine never. So the basic plan would be to play the ♠K and then finesse the hoping East holds the if nothing but low spades have appeared.

Let's see how the play might go with this plan.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦10. Since it doesn't matter where you win the first trick, let's suppose you win with dummy's ♦Q. You draw the defenders' trumps, starting with dummy's ♠K. Both defenders follow with low spades. You lead a spade from dummy, and East plays the ♠10. Now what?

East's ♠10 looks as though East might have started with ♠Q-10-3. If that's the case, it would seem right to finesse the ♠J.

Let's see what will happen when you try the finesse. You play the ♠J, and West win the trick with the ♠Q. West continues with another diamond. East follows suit and you win with the ♦A.

You draw the defenders' remaining trump.

You can drive out the opponents' ♣A. However, as soon as they gain the lead, they will take their two heart winners. 4♠ is down one, having lost one spade, one club, and two hearts.

It's too bad you made the wrong guess with the spade finesse.

Or could you have known West started with the ♠Q?

Let's look again.

## Recommended Play

West as lead the ♦10.

Before playing to the first trick, let's consider your plan again. You can afford only three losers, and you have already determined there's nothing you can do about the ♣A and two heart losers. Assuming the defenders' spades are divided 3-2, you need to focus on finding a way to avoid losing to the ♠Q. Although the standard guideline of eight ever, nine never would suggest you finesse the ♠J, is there any reason to go against the odds in spades?

Yes!

Let's go over the available clues, starting with the auction. West opened the bidding 1♥ and East passed. So West presumably has about 13 or more points and East has fewer than 6. You have 24 combined high-card points, leaving only 16 for the opponents. That still means there is room for East to hold the since that is only 2 high-card points. So you will need to look deeper to decide whether the could be with East. West has led the ♦10. Can you gather any information from that fact?

Since West would lead the top of touching cards, East must hold the ♦J. But that's only 1 high-card point you can place in the East hand. Does the opening lead place East with any other high cards?

Yes, the ♥K!

With a heart suit headed by the ♥A-K, West would almost certainly have led the ♥A to look at dummy and East's signal rather than the ♦10. After all, East might have started with shortness in hearts and West might be able to give East one or more ruffs. So West's hearts must be headed by the ♥A-Q and not the ♥A-K.

Once the opening lead places the ♦J and ♥K in East's hand, which defender holds the ♠Q?

West!

First, without the ♠Q as well as the ♥K and ♦J, West wouldn't have enough to open the bidding. Second, if East held the ♠Q in addition to the ♥K and ♦J, East would have enough to respond to the 1♥ opening bid.

So now that you have digested all the available clues, let's see how the play might go. At trick one, you can win with dummy's ♦Q. Having decided West started with the ♠Q, you can start drawing trumps by leading either the ♠A or ♠K. Let's suppose you start by playing dummy's ♠K. Both defenders follow with low spades. You lead a spade from dummy, and East plays the ♠10. Your detective work still points to West holding the ♠Q. Trusting your judgment, you play the ♠A.

West's ♠Q appears. It's a good thing you took time to examine the clues before starting to play the deal. You play the ♠J, drawing East's last trump, and the rest is easy. You just have to drive out the defenders' ♣A... which you know West holds. The defenders can take their two heart tricks. If they don't, you can discard a heart loser on dummy's fourth club.

You lose two hearts and a club, but no spades.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K75<br>♥ J94<br>♦ KQ5<br>♣ KJ73</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q4<br>♥ AQT76<br>♦ T97<br>♣ A84</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T83<br>♥ K82<br>♦ J642<br>♣ 962</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ962<br>♥ 53<br>♦ A83<br>♣ QT5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When you are missing the ace-king-queen in a suit and the opening leader doesn't lead the suit, there is a very strong inference that the opening leader does not hold the ace-king in the suit. Leading an ace from ace-king against a suit contract is usually an excellent idea, since you get to look at dummy and see partner's signal before deciding what to do next. So the failure to lead the suit indicates a broken holding such as ace-queen from which a lead of the ace is far less attractive. Making inferences about the cards the defenders hold based on their leads and signals is an important aspect of declarer play.

On this deal, you can place virtually all the missing high cards on the opening lead alone.

Notice East's clever play of the ♠10 on the second round of spades, trying to induce you into taking the finesse. It cost East nothing to make this play. Hopefully, you were paying more attention to the other clues to overcome this falsecard.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/11)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/12)

### By Date

Use the links below.