---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-13'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/13'

next: false
---

# 2024-10-14

In today's column, how should you handle the key suit?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A75<br>♥ AKQJ<br>♦ Q952<br>♣ A5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. North and South are vulnerable, and East and West are not. As dealer there is a chance to choose an opening call.

With a balanced hand and 20 high-card points, this hand falls in the 20-21 point range for opening 2NT.

West passes. North responds 3♣, and East passes. It's time to select a rebid.

Partner's 3♣ is the Stayman convention, asking whether you have a four-card or longer major suit. With a nice four-card heart suit, you reply 3♥.

West passes again. North bids 3NT, and East passes. There is another chance to select a call.

Partner was presumably interested in finding an eight-card spade fit. With only three spades, there's no reason to do anything except pass and play game in 3NT.

West also passes, ending the auction. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣6.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QJ42<br>♥ 83<br>♦ JT764<br>♣ K7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A75<br>♥ AKQJ<br>♦ Q952<br>♣ A5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 7 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit and, with a four-card spade suit, was hoping to find a major-suit fit in spades.

Making 3NT requires nine tricks. Playing in notrump, begin by counting the sure tricks. You have one sure spade trick, your ♠A. There are four sure heart tricks in your hand. There are two sure club tricks, your ♣A and dummy's ♣K. There are no sure diamond winners since the opponents hold the ♦A and ♦K. That's a total of seven immediate winners: one spade, four hearts, and two clubs. Two more tricks are needed to make the contract.

You aren't getting any more tricks from hearts or clubs.

The spade suit can provide at least one extra trick by driving out the defenders' ♠K. If the defenders' six spades divide exactly 3-3, you will get a second extra trick through length.

The diamond suit can provide three extra winners through promotion by driving out the defenders' ♦A and ♦K. Promotion is a sure thing since it doesn't depend on how the missing diamonds are divided or which defender holds the missing honors. So it looks as though diamonds is a better suit to go after than spades since it will provide enough winners to make an overtrick.

There's a problem, however. In Considering the Order, you have to watch out for the opponents. West has led a club and the defenders will be able to establish at least three club winners to take after your ♣A and ♣K are gone. Since you have to let the opponents gain the lead twice in diamonds to establish the suit, the defenders will win the race and get their winners established first.

So it looks as though you will have to rely on getting two extra winners from the spade suit. Are there any further considerations?

Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣6. Suppose you choose to win this trick with dummy's ♣K so you will be in the right hand to lead the ♠Q to try to trap the ♠K in East's hand. East follows with the ♣9, an encouraging attitude signal.

Suppose you lead the ♠Q from dummy. East follows with a low spade, you play low, and West wins the ♠K. The finesse has lost, but the ♠J has now been promoted into a winner, and you still have the chance the defenders' spades were originally divided 3-3.

West leads another club an this drives out your ♣A.

Before testing the spades, you can take the heart winners. Perhaps a defender will helpfully discard a spade. When you take the heart winners, however, neither defender discards a spade. Nothing left to do but try the spades. Both defenders follow when the ♠A is played. So far, so good. When you lead another spade to dummy's ♠J, West follows but East shows out, discarding a club. The spades have failed divide 3-3. West still has a spade remaining.

You can lead a diamond but West wins and has the rest of the tricks. The contract is down one.

West held the ♠K and the defenders' spades divided 4-2. Was there anything you could have done?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣6.

With only seven immediate tricks, you need two more and they can't come from the diamond suit. They will have to come from the spade suit. That shouldn't be a problem if the missing spades divide 3-3, but what if they are 4-2 or worse?

You will be okay if West holds the ♠K since you can lead twice toward dummy's ♠Q and ♠J to establish the extra winners you need.

If East holds the ♠K, it won't help to lead a spade honor from dummy. Instead, you will have to hope the defenders' spades are divided 3-3. If West does hold the ♠K, however, you may need an entry to dummy once the spades are established. With three or more spades, West may hold up until the third round of the suit.

So you should win the first trick with the ♣A in your hand, keeping the ♣K as a later entry to dummy.

You can now take a trick with the ♠A, just in case either defender started with a singleton ♠K. Both defenders follow with low spades, however. You now take the first finesse in spades by leading a low spade toward dummy and playing the ♠J when West follows with a low spade. This wins as East follows with a low spade. You have established one of the extra tricks you need. You can't afford to lead another spade from dummy since that won't work if the defenders' spades are divided 4-2. Instead, you cross back to your hand with one of the heart winners. You now take a second spade finesse by leading toward dummy's ♠Q. West plays the ♠K, so you play a low spade from dummy. East shows out on this trick, so West started with four spades and East only two.

West leads another club and you win this with dummy's carefully-preserved ♣K. That's the entry you needed to reach dummy's last spade winner. In dummy for the last time, you take the established spade winner. You can now lead a heart and take the remaining three heart winners. That's nine tricks.

The defenders have the rest of the tricks, but you have made the contract. You took three spade tricks to go with the four heart tricks and two club tricks. You were able to take three spade tricks even though the defenders' spades divided 4-2.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QJ42<br>♥ 83<br>♦ JT764<br>♣ K7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT83<br>♥ 754<br>♦ A<br>♣ QT864</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 96<br>♥ T962<br>♦ K83<br>♣ J932</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A75<br>♥ AKQJ<br>♦ Q952<br>♣ A5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Handling the spade suit is critical on this deal. Needing three tricks, declarer shouldn't start by leading the ♠Q or ♠J from dummy. That won't be a good idea if East started with a singleton ♠K or West started with either a singleton or doubleton ♠K. Instead, declarer takes a repeated finesse in spades by leading twice toward dummy's ♠J and ♠Q. This will work whenever West holds the ♠K — a 50% chance. It will also work if the finesse loses to the ♠K in East's hand but the missing spades divide 3-3. Declarer needs to keep an entry to dummy to reach the spade winners once they are established in case the defenders hold up.

On this deal, there are enough entries to declarer's hand that declarer can afford to start by taking a trick with the ♠A, guarding against East holding a singleton ♠K. If declarer were more limited in entries, declarer could start by leading toward one of dummy's spade honors and then use the ♠A as an entry back to lead toward the remaining honor.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/14)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/12)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/14#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.