---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-14'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/14'

next:
  text: '2024-10-16'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/16'
---

# 2024-10-15

In today's deal, the opponents have outbid your side. Will they prevail?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A6<br>♥ T7642<br>♦ K76<br>♣ T95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to choose a call in first position.

There are 7 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. With a balanced hand, there's nothing to do but pass for now.

West opens the bidding 1♣. Your partner, North, overcalls 1♦, and East responds 1♠. The auction is back to you.

Since partner's overcall shows a five-card or longer suit, three-card support is enough to raise, especially when including a high honor. An advance of an overcall to the two level shows about the same strength as raising partner's opening bid. So you compete with 2♦.

West raises responder's suit to 2♠. Partner competes further with 3♦, and East also continues to compete by bidding 3♠. You have another opportunity to make a call.

Partner would have taken stronger action than rebidding diamonds if interested in game, such as bidding a new suit, cuebidding, or doubling. So partner's raise is merely competitive, likely showing extra distribution but not necessarily extra strength. You have what you've already shown and you have some defensive prospects against 3♠. No reason to be pushed any higher.

West and partner both pass, ending the auction. You now have to choose an opening lead against East's 3♠ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>2♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♦</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

Choosing the suit to lead is not too challenging. Leading the suit that partner has bid and raised is rarely wrong unless there is a clearly better option. Unless holding the ace, a low card is led from three or more cards headed by an honor after supporting the suit.

## Possible Defense

So let's assume you lead the ♦6 and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJT3<br>♥ KJ53<br>♦ J2<br>♣ KQ4</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A6<br>♥ T7642<br>♦ K76<br>♣ T95</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

A low diamond is played from dummy and partner wins the first trick with the ♦A as declarer follows with a low diamond. Partner returns the ♦8 and you win the ♦K as both declarer and dummy follow suit again. You now have your first key decision. What are you playing next?

It certainly doesn't appear right to continue with another diamond. First declarer can simply ruff and win the trick. Second, if declarer has no more diamonds, declarer can then discard a potential loser - a ruff and a sluff. Leading a trump is just doing declarer's work on this deal.

Leading a heart is not necessary. If partner has the ♥A-Q, for example, partner will get them anyway when declarer has to play the suit.

That leaves clubs. It may be necessary to lead a club at this point. If partner holds the ♣A and you may be able to establish a second club winner before declarer has an opportunity to discard any club loser on dummy's hearts. It seems best to lead the ♣10, top of the touching cards. That way, partner will know you don't have the ♣J.

You switch to the ♣10, declarer plays dummy's ♣Q, and partner wins the ♣A. That's the third trick for the defense, and you still hold the ♠A. Next, partner switches to the ♥9 and declarer wins with the ♥A.

Declarer now leads the ♠9. It looks as though declarer may be missing the ♠Q and planning to take a finesse, hoping you hold the ♠Q. You are at another critical point in the play. What are you playing to this trick?

If declarer is indeed planning to finesse dummy's ♠J, hoping you hold the ♠Q and your partner the ♠A, then you need to play low smoothly. If you hesitate, declarer will likely assume it is because you hold the ♠A since you wouldn't hesitate if you had the ♠Q. So it is best to be prepared for this situation beforehand. Have you decided what you will do?

If you play low smoothly, second hand low, your side could win a fourth trick when declarer tries the finesse and your partner holds the ♠Q. Your remaining ♠A will then become the setting trick.

Suppose you play low with the ♠6. Declarer, however, takes the trick with dummy's ♠K. Declarer draws a second round of trumps, partner follows suit with a low spade, and declarer plays the losing to your ♠A. All the defenders' trumps are gone.

Declarer claims the rest of the tricks, making 3♠. Your side took two diamonds, one club, and one spade, but that's all.

Declarer had solid trumps and never needed to take a spade finesse. Was there something you could have done to defeat the contract?

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♦6 and partner wins with the ♦A. You win the second trick as partner returns a diamond. At trick three, you lead the ♣10, finding partner with the ♣A as dummy's ♣Q is played. If partner holds the ♣J and returns the suit, you will establish a club winner before declarer can potentially discard a club on dummy's hearts. Partner, however, switches to the ♥9. Declarer wins with the ♥A. What is going on in the heart suit?

The only missing hearts are the ♥Q and ♥8. Partner would have led the ♥8 from a holding of ♥Q-9-8 or the ♥Q-8. So partner is either leading a singleton ♥9 or top of a doubleton ♥9-8.

Declarer now leads the ♠9. What are you playing to this trick?

It is important to do your thinking when partner led the ♥9 at trick four. It would be unusual for partner to switch to a doubleton heart into dummy's holding, potentially making things easy for declarer if you held the ♥Q. So partner's ♥9 is very likely to be a singleton.

If that's the case, you don't want to waste any time winning the ♠A. Partner is unlikely to have more than two spades. Following through with your reasoning, you lead a heart and are rewarded when partner ruffs with the ♠8. That's the fifth trick for the defense.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but 3♠ is down one. Your side took two diamonds, a club, the ♠A, and a heart ruff.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 84<br>♥ 9<br>♦ AQ9853<br>♣ A732</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJT3<br>♥ KJ53<br>♦ J2<br>♣ KQ4</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q9752<br>♥ AQ8<br>♦ T4<br>♣ J86</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A6<br>♥ T7642<br>♦ K76<br>♣ T95</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You do well to defeat the opponents' contract since your side can make 3♦. You pushed the opponents one level too high without getting pushed one level too high yourselves. Your switch to the ♣T told partner you didn't have the ♣J, so partner could see there was no future in clubs. Partner then switched to the singleton heart, hoping you either held the ♥A and could lead back a heart immediately, or you held the ♠A and could lead a heart on gaining the lead with it.

Being prepared to play low smoothly when declarer is potentially going to take a losing finesse is often a good idea. However, it is important to have thought out the situation earlier so you know when you should rise rather than play low.

Here, declarer made it more challenging by leading low toward dummy when holding the ♠Q. If declarer had led the ♠Q, it would be easy to take the ♠A right away.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/15)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/08)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/22)

### By Date

Use the links below.