---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-16'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/16'

next:
  text: '2024-10-18'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/18'
---

# 2024-10-17

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q86<br>♥ A5<br>♦ AJT8<br>♣ AKQJ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make in first position.

You have a balanced hand with 21 high-card points. That fits nicely into the partnership range of 20-21 points for a 2NT opening bid.

West passes, and partner, North, raises to 3NT. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Having described the hand, you have nothing more to say. Partner has decided How High and Where to play the contract.

West passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥2, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJ7<br>♥ 73<br>♦ K954<br>♣ T973</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q86<br>♥ A5<br>♦ AJT8<br>♣ AKQJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As declarer, you start by counting the number of sure tricks in the combined hands. You don't have any immediate spade winners since the opponents hold the ♠A. You start with one sure heart trick, the ♥A. There are four sure club tricks, the ♣A, ♣K, ♣Q and ♣J. You also start with two sure diamond tricks, the ♦A and ♦K. That's seven sure winners: a heart, four clubs, and two diamonds. You need to develop two more tricks to make the contract.

You aren't getting any more tricks from hearts or clubs.

In spades, you can promote two winners by driving out the ♠A.

In diamonds, you have a two-way finesse for the missing ♦Q. You can get all four diamond tricks by finessing against East if East holds the ♦Q. Alternatively, you can get all four diamond tricks by finessing against West if West holds the ♦Q. Even if you lose a trick to the ♦Q, you will have developed one extra winner.

So there are ways to establish the extra tricks you need. Are there any problems?

Definitely. West has led a heart and the opponents will drive out the ♥A. The opponents have nine hearts, so one of the defenders will have at least five hearts. Since West has led the ♥2, presumably fourth best, it looks as though West is the defender with four hearts and East has five hearts. If you have to give up a trick in another suit, the defenders will have enough established winners to defeat the contract. So promoting the extra winners from the spade suit is out. That means you need four tricks from the diamond suit and will need to decide which defender holds the ♦Q.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥2. You play low from dummy and East plays the ♥K. You have an immediate decision. Are you winning this trick?

It probably won't make any difference, so you might as well hold up. Perhaps the opponents will switch to another suit!

As you expected, however, East returns a heart and, this time, you have to win the ♥A. You are now at the critical point in the play. Which defender are you planning to play for the ♦Q?

Since you still don't have a sure way to tell which defender holds the ♦Q, it may seem as though it's a 50-50 guess. You could try leading the ♦J, hoping that West would cover an honor with an honor if holding the ♦Q. That would solve all your problems. If, however, West doesn't cover the ♦J, it will be a guess. You might rise with dummy's ♦K and then continue with a second round of diamonds, finessing against the hoped-for ♦Q in East's hand.

So let's see what will happen if that's what you do. You play the ♦J, and West plays the ♦2. What do you play from dummy?

Suppose you follow your plan and play dummy's ♦K as East plays a low diamond. You continue with dummy's ♦4. Unfortunately, East shows out on this trick, discarding a club.

You may as well win the ♦A. There's not much you can do now. You can take your four club winners, but the contract is doomed since West still has the ♦Q and the opponents have the ♠A and three established heart winners to take. 3NT will be down two.

Could you have known West held the ♦Q?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥2, and you let East's ♥K win the first trick. At trick two, you win the ♥A. What next? Is it time to tackle the diamond suit?

Whenever you have a critical guess to make, you generally want to delay it as long as possible so you can gather as much information as you can. It can't hurt to take the four club winners before deciding how to play the diamonds.

Let's see what will happen if you do start with the clubs. You play one of your high clubs and both defenders follow suit with low clubs. You continue with another high club and, this time, West shows out, discarding a low spade. That's some information. East started with four clubs and West with only one. You play another club and West discards another low spade. You play your last club winner. West discards yet another spade.

Okay, you can't put the key decision off any longer. Which defender should you play for the ♦Q?

West!

West led the ♥2, presumably from a four-card suit. If West held a five-card suit, West would likely have led from that suit rather than a four-card suit. You also know that West started with a singleton club. So you can infer that West's original distribution was 4=4=4=1. West started with four diamonds. You have a sure thing!

You take a trick with the ♦A. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. You lead the ♦J, and West follows with a low diamond. What now?

You tempted West to cover with the ♦Q. Even though West didn't fall for that ploy, you have already made your decision. You play low from dummy, and East shows out. That's what you expected. You continue with the ♦10, again winning the trick as West plays another low diamond. You play your last diamond and dummy's ♦K takes care of West's ♦Q.

The opponents have the rest of the tricks, but you've made the contract by determining how to play the diamond suit without giving up the lead to the opponents. You took a heart, four clubs, and four diamond tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJ7<br>♥ 73<br>♦ K954<br>♣ T973</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 5432<br>♥ QT82<br>♦ Q632<br>♣ 6</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AT9<br>♥ KJ964<br>♦ 7<br>♣ 8542</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q86<br>♥ A5<br>♦ AJT8<br>♣ AKQJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When the contract relies on deciding how to play a particular suit, you want to get as much information as possible before deciding how to play the suit.

Playing the club suit on this deal allows you to infer how the diamond suit is divided. However, you must be watching the cards the opponents lead and play if you are to take advantage of any available information.

On this deal, you get your first piece of information when West leads the ♥2. Since this is the lowest heart, you can assume West is leading from a four-card suit and not a five-card or longer suit. When a player leads from a four-card suit against a notrump contract with no particular information from the auction, you can usually infer that the player doesn't have a longer suit to lead from. By playing the club suit before the diamond suit, you discover West started with only one club. So you can draw the inference that West's original distribution was 4=4=4=1.

The opponents don't plan to assist your side, but sometimes they can't help but provide the information you need.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/17)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/14)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/18)

### By Date

Use the links below.