---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-17'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/17'

next: false
---

# 2024-10-18

On this deal, can you guard against the potential danger from the opponents?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 832<br>♥ KQJ964<br>♦ A8<br>♣ K7</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 2♠, a weak two-bid. You have to decide what call to make.

You have 13 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit. You would definitely open at the one level or overcall at the two level. It's a little riskier to overcall at the three level, but you have a good enough suit and a good enough hand that you have to act. You don't want East's preempt to shut your side out of the auction.

West passes. Partner, North, advances to 4♥. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

You've certainly done enough with the three-level overcall. You pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠K, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A7<br>♥ 82<br>♦ KQJ74<br>♣ 8542</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 832<br>♥ KQJ964<br>♦ A8<br>♣ K7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner doesn't have very good heart support but does have some useful values.

In planning the play in 4♥, start by considering the potential losers. How many do you have?

You have a sure heart loser since you are missing the ♥A. If the five missing hearts don't divide 3-2, you could have a second loser since you are missing the ♥10. You will be left with two potential spade losers in your hand once dummy's is gone. You don't have any diamond losers. However, there are two potential club losers in your hand since the opponents have all the high clubs other than the ♣K. Assuming you have only one heart loser - you probably can't make the contract if you have a second heart loser - there are five potential losers: a heart, two spades, and two clubs. You need to eliminate two of them.

You could hope to discard both spade losers on dummy's extra diamond winners, but only after trumps have been drawn. However, West has led a spade and you will have to let the opponents gain the lead with the ♥A when drawing trumps. So there's not going to be anything you can do about one of the spade losers.

What about planning to ruff your third spade in dummy?

There are two problems with that idea. First, you are going to have to give up a spade trick before you can ruff a loser in dummy. That will give the defenders a chance to play the ♥A and a second heart, removing dummy's trumps. Second, West opened with a weak 2♠ bid. How are the defenders' spades likely divided?

East likely has a six-card spade suit, leaving West with only two.

Therefore, if you try to ruff the third round of spades in dummy before the trumps are drawn, West may be able to ruff higher than dummy if West holds the ♥10. So the only real hope for eliminating a spade loser is to plan to discard one on dummy's diamonds after trumps are drawn.

In clubs, one possibility for avoiding a club loser is to lead a club from dummy toward the hoping East holds the ♣A. That's usually a 50-50 proposition. Is that the case here?

No.

East opened with a weak 2♠ bid. Although East could have an outside ace, it is more likely that West holds the ♣A.

So, as with the third spade loser, the best chance to avoid two club losers is to plan to discard one or both on dummy's extra diamond winners. What is the problem with this idea?

You can't take all of dummy's diamond winners until the trumps have been drawn and that requires letting the opponents gain the lead with the ♥A. They will then be in a position to take their spade and club tricks.

Since you are missing six diamonds, would it be a good idea to try to discard one of your losers before drawing trumps, hoping the defenders' diamonds are divided 3-3?

No!

Even if the defenders' diamonds are divided 3-3, you will only be able to discard one loser. After that, the opponents will be able to ruff any more diamonds with low trumps and you don't have an entry back to dummy's diamonds once the ♣A is gone. You need to be able to discard at least two losers.

Based on the available evidence, it looks as though you are going to have to draw the defenders' trumps after you gain the lead. What is the danger in doing that?

If East holds the ♥A, East will be in a position to lead a club, trapping your ♣K. If East holds the ♥A, West almost certainly holds the ♣A so you will lose at least four tricks: a heart, a spade, and two clubs. So you will have to hope that West holds the ♥A. If that's the case, is there any further danger?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠K. You immediately have a key decision. Should you win this trick?

Since East has preempted in spades, it might seem that you want to win the ♠A right away in case West started with only one spade.

Let's see what will happen on this deal if you win the first trick with the ♠A. Suppose you win the first trick with the ♠A. East plays the ♠Q on this trick, presumably showing the ♠J as well. Since you can't use dummy's diamonds until trumps are drawn, let's assume you lead a heart at trick two. East follows and West wins the trick with the ♥A. That's good news. West can't lead a club without establishing a trick for your ♣K.

West, however, leads a spade and East wins with the ♠9. East now leads the ♣Q. You can hopefully try the ♣K but, as you anticipated, West has the ♣A. West leads back a club, and East wins with the ♣10. You've already lost four tricks. Worse, East now leads another spade. You have to follow suit, and West is able to ruff this with the ♥10. That's the fifth trick for the defense.

You have the rest of the tricks, but the 4♥ contract is down two.

You were fortunate to find West with the ♥A rather than East. However, that wasn't good enough since East was still able to gain the lead. What should be done differently?

Let's return to trick one.

## Recommended Play

After West leads the ♠K, you look at the available clues and make your plan.

As discussed earlier, you are going to have to make use of dummy's diamonds to discard at least two of your losers, and that is going to require that you draw the defenders' trumps first. Since East is the dangerous opponent, capable of trapping your ♣K, you have to hope that West holds the ♥A, not East. As you have seen, however, West holding the ♥A is not enough. You still need to prevent East from gaining the lead before trumps are drawn. What can you do to avoid letting East gain the lead?

You can play a low spade, letting West's ♠K win the trick!

By holding up winning the first trick, you leave West, the safe opponent, on lead. Also, you prevent West from reaching East's hand with a spade.

Let's see the difference that makes on this deal. West continues with another spade, and you win dummy's ♠A. What is the spade situation at this point?

West should have no spades remaining.

East's weak two-bid indicates a six-card suit, and West's lead of the ♠K followed by a low spade is consistent with West having started with a doubleton spade, especially since East signaled with the ♠Q. What now?

You still need to draw the defenders' trumps before you can make use of dummy's diamonds. You lead a heart to the ♥K and West wins the ♥A. You are pleased to see that. You can't afford for East to gain the lead.

West has no spades left to lead and can see the danger of the diamond suit in dummy. So West takes a trick with the ♣A, hoping East holds the ♣K. That establishes your ♣K as a winner. West leads another club, and you win the ♣K.

Since you still have a spade loser, should you try to ruff it in dummy?

No.

You know West has no spades remaining and you don't want to give West a chance to ruff with a higher heart than dummy. Instead, draw another round of trumps. You are pleased to see both defenders follow suit. That means the defenders' hearts have divided 3-2 and there is only one trump outstanding. You draw the last trump, West's ♥10.

Now it is safe to take the diamond winners, starting with the ♦A, high card from the short side first. You cross to dummy with your low diamond. On one of dummy's high diamonds, you discard the remaining spade loser. Notice that West did well to take the ♣A, otherwise, you could have discarded both your clubs on dummy's diamonds at this point and made an overtrick. You have the last three tricks with your remaining trump winners.

You've made the 4♥ contract, losing only a spade, a heart, and a club.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A7<br>♥ 82<br>♦ KQJ74<br>♣ 8542</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K6<br>♥ AT7<br>♦ 9653<br>♣ A963</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QJT954<br>♥ 53<br>♦ T2<br>♣ QJT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 832<br>♥ KQJ964<br>♦ A8<br>♣ K7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With West holding the ♣A, it's critical that East didn't gain the lead. Even if East did hold the ♣A, you would still be in danger if East were to lead a third round of spades before trumps were drawn. You then couldn't prevent West from getting a trick with the ♥10. So you basically needed West to hold both missing aces. You must also prevent East from gaining the lead in spades. The auction and West's lead of the ♠K gave you the clues to have the best chance of making the contract.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/14)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/17)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/18#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.