---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-18'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/18'

next: false
---

# 2024-10-19

On this deal, you need to find a way to get to dummy's winners.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQJT4<br>♥ A542<br>♦ K75<br>♣ Q</td>
	</tr>
</table>

This deal was played in the 1950s at the Wellesley club in London, England. Sitting South was John Collings, playing with Harold Franklin.

Both sides were vulnerable and, as dealer, Collings had to choose an opening call.

With 15 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit, he had more than enough to open the bidding at the one level. With an unbalanced hand, he naturally opened in the long suit.

West passed, and his partner, North, responded 2♣. This was in the days before two-over-one game force was popular, so the 2♣ bid was forcing, but not game-forcing. East passed, and Collings had to choose a rebid.

Collings showed the second suit, hearts.

West then doubled. Since this was in the middle of an auction in which three suits had been bid, West was presumably showing length and strength in hearts. Collings' partner jumped to 3♠, and East passed. Collings had to decide what to do after these developments.

Since the initial 2♣ response was not forcing to game, a rebid of only 2♠ would not be forcing. So the jump to 3♠ showed a game-going hand with three-card support for spades. Collings might have suggested playing in 3NT at this point or might have made a control-showing bid of 4♦ in case partner was interested in slam. However, he elected to simply bid 4♠. He had a lot of potential heart losers to worry about and not a particularly good fit with partner's club suit. So let's go with that.

West and partner both pass, but East then made a penalty double. What do you think Collings did at this point?

With good spades and more than a minimum opening bid, you might consider redoubling at this point. You expect to make the contract. In fact, in one of the write-ups of this deal, it shows Collings redoubling. That's quite likely since Collings was a very aggressive bidder. Other reports, however, have Collings passing at this point. Let's go with a pass.

West and partner both pass, ending the auction. Collings was the declarer in 4♠ doubled with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>X</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

Before we see how Collings played the contract, let's suppose you were in the South position as declarer. How would you handle 4♠ doubled?

West leads the ♣9, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 863<br>♥ Q3<br>♦ Q82<br>♣ AKJ82</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQJT4<br>♥ A542<br>♦ K75<br>♣ Q</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has an opening bid and three-card support for spades, but you have some work to do.

You start by considering the potential losers. In the trump suit, there will be only one loser if the five missing spades are divided no worse than 4-1. If they are divided 5-0 with East holding all of them, it will be difficult to avoid a second loser since you don't have enough entries or spades in dummy to keep leading toward your hand. So it seems best to assume the spades are divided 3-2 or 4-1. There are three potential heart losers in your hand after the ♥A is gone. In diamonds, your combined ♦K and ♦Q guarantee you have one trick in the suit, but that still leaves you with two potential losers. You don't have any club losers in the suit itself. However, despite all of your combined high cards, you seem to have a lot of potential losers. You have a sure spade loser, three heart losers, and two diamond losers. You need to eliminate three of those losers if you are to make the contract.

You can't do anything about the spade loser. You're always going to have to lose the ♠A.

In hearts, however, you may be able to establish a trick with dummy's ♥Q by leading a low heart toward it, hoping West holds the ♥K. Is it likely West holds the ♥K?

Yes! West doubled your 2♥ bid during the auction, suggesting length and strength in hearts.

An additional possibility is to plan to ruff your fourth heart in dummy after losing a trick to West's ♥K and getting tricks with both the ♥Q and ♥A. Is that likely to work?

No! West's double showed both length and strength in hearts, so East is presumably short in hearts. If you try to ruff a heart in dummy before drawing trumps, East will likely be able to overruff. If you draw trumps first, then there will be no spades left in dummy with which to ruff a heart loser.

Another possibility is to plan to discard one or more of your heart losers on dummy's extra club winners. You might also be able to discard one or more of your diamond losers. Is there any problem with this idea?

Yes! West has led the ♣9, possibly a singleton or top of a doubleton. If you win the first trick in dummy and start to take a couple more club winners before drawing trumps, West may ruff one of your club winners. Besides, winning the first club in dummy means squandering your ♣Q under dummy's ♣K or ♣A, restricting you to three club tricks.

What about winning the first club with the ♣Q in your hand, drawing the defenders' trumps, and then planning to take dummy's remaining club winners to discard heart and diamond losers?

The challenge with that approach is that you don't have a sure entry to dummy after winning the first club trick in your hand. You might hope to get there by leading toward dummy's ♦Q, hoping West holds the ♦A. Is that likely to work?

No! East doubled the final contract and, since West likely holds the ♥K, East almost certainly holds both the ♠A and ♦A. Perhaps you can use dummy's ♥Q as an entry to dummy once trumps are drawn. Let's see what will likely happen during the play.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣9. Let's assume you play low from dummy and win the first trick with the ♣Q in your hand. Suppose you decide to start drawing the defenders' trumps by leading the ♠K. West plays low, and East wins the trick with the ♠A. At least the spades aren't divided 5-0.

East now leads a heart, presenting you with a problem. You are at the critical point in the play.

East's lead has forced you to play on hearts a little earlier than you planned. You were hoping to develop an entry to dummy with the ♥Q after trumps were drawn. Still, if you play low, dummy's ♥Q will become a winner.

But let's see what will happen if you do play low now. West wins the trick with the ♥K. Based on the auction, you expected that to happen. Dummy's ♥Q is now a winner. West returns a heart, and East ruffs with the ♠7. Oops, that's unfortunate. It's not entirely unexpected, however. West did show both strength and length in hearts with the double during the auction.

East now takes a trick with the ♦A. That's the fourth trick for the defense and the contract is down one.

It seems you have no winning option when East shifts to a heart. If you play low, West will win the trick and East will get a ruff. If you win the ♥A and draw the defenders' trumps, you won't be able to reach dummy and will lose three hearts and two diamonds.

So how did John Collings manage to make the contract?

## The Actual Play

On the actual deal, West led the ♣9 and Collings won the first trick with the ♣Q. He started drawing trumps by leading the ♠K. East won the trick with the ♠A. When East shifted to the ♥6, Collings made his first key play.

He won the trick with the ♥A!

He was fairly certain that East's ♥6 was a singleton. First, West had shown length and strength in hearts with the double of 2♥. Second, he could see all the lower-ranking hearts between his hand and the dummy. So East couldn't be leading top of a doubleton.

Collings drew a second round of trumps with the ♠Q. Both defenders followed suit to this trick, so the defenders' spades were originally divided 3-2. There was only one spade left outstanding, the ♠9. Collings then made his second critical play. What do you think he led to the next trick?

He led a low spade!

He gave up a spade to East's lowly ♠9. East was on lead. East, however, had no spades left to lead and, as Collings had surmised, had no hearts left to lead. A club lead would give Collings four club winners in dummy on which to discard three heart losers and a diamond loser. The lead of a low diamond would allow Collings to win with dummy's ♦Q, discard the heart losers on dummy's club winners, and then lead toward the ♦K to avoid losing two diamond tricks. So East could do no better than play the ♦A, hoping West held the ♦K.

When East continued with another diamond, Collings won with dummy's ♦Q. Collings was able to take three club winners in dummy and discard all three heart losers.

He had the rest of the tricks with his diamond and trump winners, making the 4♠ doubled contract. He lost a diamond trick and two spade tricks, but no heart tricks.

## The Rest of the Story

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 863<br>♥ Q3<br>♦ Q82<br>♣ AKJ82</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 52<br>♥ KJT987<br>♦ J64<br>♣ 95</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ A97<br>♥ 6<br>♦ AT93<br>♣ T7643</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQJT4<br>♥ A542<br>♦ K75<br>♣ Q</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The technique Collings used to make the contract is an endplay. He put East on lead with no option but to lead either a diamond or a club. Whatever East did, declarer would make the contract.

It would have done East no good to play the ♠9 under the on the second round of trumps. Collings could then use the ♠8 as an entry to dummy's club winners, losing only a spade and two diamonds.

The deal has been reported in a couple of different variations. In one report, it occurred during the Surrey Rose Bowl, Collings was playing with Desmond Luxton, in which North was the dealer and the final contract was redoubled. There is little doubt, however, that Collings declared and made the 4♠ contract in spectacular fashion by endplaying East and giving up an "unnecessary" trump trick. It was the type of remarkable play that Collings often made.



Dimitri Roundel (John) Collings learned to play auction bridge with his parents and his sister when he was only five years old. It wasn't until the late 1940s that he learned to play "real" bridge, being introduced to the game by his brother-in-law, Desmond Luxton, who had just returned from the war. Collings honed his game playing in the regular Coffee Shop game at Lederer's in London. It was a strong game, and kibitzers sat around watching the bidding and play. If someone noticed a mistake, they would ring a bell.

John Collings was only the 46th person to become a Life Master in England. He was also the 15th person from that country to become a World Grand Master. Over a 35-year period, he represented England five times in the European Championships and once in the Bermuda Bowl World Championship. He also represented Switzerland in both the European and World Championships. Collings holds the unique record of having represented England in the Camrose Trophy - the annual contest among England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales - over five different decades, each time with a different partner.

In the 1980s, while partnered with Paul Hackett, he played the innovative Walpurgis Club. This was a system in which you passed in first or second position to show a strong hand. Partner was then obliged to bid something in third or fourth position, even with a very weak hand, so that the deal wouldn't get passed out. They played this system in international competition, winning a Silver Medal for Great Britain in 1981 and finishing fifth in the World Championships that year.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/19)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/18)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/19#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.