---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-20'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/20'

next:
  text: '2024-10-22'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/22'
---

# 2024-10-21

In this deal, how much luck do you need?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK8<br>♥ 94<br>♦ AK643<br>♣ JT8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South with both sides vulnerable. As the dealer, you have the first opportunity to open the bidding.

There are 15 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. The hand is balanced and falls in the middle of the 15-17 range for an opening bid of 1NT. Even with weak holdings in two suits, the 1NT opening is far more descriptive than an opening 1♦ bid and will also lead to fewer rebid problems. Another advantage is it takes the entire one level away from the opponents.

West passes. North raises to 3NT, and East passes. The auction is back to you.

Partner's raise to game is a signoff bid. You are expected to pass.

West passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥6. Dummy comes down with a balanced hand and 10 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card club suit.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 975<br>♥ K7<br>♦ J72<br>♣ AQ964</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AK8<br>♥ 94<br>♦ AK643<br>♣ JT8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You need nine tricks in 3NT. In a notrump contract, begin making a plan by counting the sure winners you have. You start with two spade winners, your ♠A and ♠K. You don't start with any sure heart winners. The opponents have all the high hearts other than the ♥K. There is one sure club winner, dummy's ♣A. There are two sure diamond winners, your ♦A and ♦K. That's a total of five sure winners: two spades, one club, and two diamonds. Four more winners are needed to make the 3NT contract.

You aren't getting any extra tricks from spades.

The heart suit offers a 50% chance for one trick with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♥A. Since West has led a heart, there is really no choice but to hope the finesse wins. If East holds the ♥A, you are likely going to lose the first five heart tricks, maybe more.

The club suit offers the chance for four additional tricks with the help of a finesse. If West holds the ♣K, a 50% chance, it can be trapped by leading the ♣J and repeating the finesse by leading the ♣10. If the finesse loses, three extra tricks will have been promoted.

The diamond suit will provide an additional trick if the ♦Q falls singleton or doubleton under that ♦A-K. That's against the odds, less than a 30% chance. Even if the ♦Q doesn't fall, two additional tricks can be established through length if the five missing diamonds divide 3-2.

So the odds favor going after the needed extra winners in clubs, a straight 50% chance. Will that be good enough?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥6. The only hope to avoid losing all the heart tricks is to try dummy's ♥K at trick one. It wins! First hurdle overcome.

You need to be in your hand to try the club finesse. You can cross with the ♠K. You lead the ♣J and, when West follows with a low club, you play low from dummy, trying the finesse. Unfortunately, this loses to East's ♣K. So much for the 50% chance. At least you've established all the extra winners you need.

East leads back a heart and West wins. West takes three more heart tricks. The good news is West started with only a five-card heart suit. The bad news is the contract is down one.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥6. You have no choice but to try the ♥K from dummy. Good news! It wins and you have the lead.

The odds favor trying the club finesse to establish the extra winners you need. However, there is also a chance to establish the extra winners from the diamond suit, even though the odds aren't as good.

On this deal, you can afford to combine the chances.

You can start with the diamonds and, if that doesn't work out, you can fall back on the second chance in the club suit.

You play a low diamond to the ♦K. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. No singleton ♦Q, but the chances are still alive. You continue with the ♦A. Good news! The ♦Q falls from West. You are going to be able to get all the tricks you need from the diamond suit. A low diamond to dummy's ♦J removes East's remaining diamond. You can cross to your hand with a spade to reach the remaining diamond winners. You take the two established diamond winners.

The ♠A is the eighth trick. You lead the ♣J but, when West follows with a low club, you win dummy's ♣A. You've had enough good fortune on this deal. You don't want to risk the contract going for overtricks.

The defenders have the rest of the tricks, but you have made the contract. You took two spade tricks, one heart trick, one club trick, and five diamond tricks.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 975<br>♥ K7<br>♦ J72<br>♣ AQ964</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T64<br>♥ AQT63<br>♦ Q9<br>♣ 532</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QJ32<br>♥ J852<br>♦ T85<br>♣ K7</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AK8<br>♥ 94<br>♦ AK643<br>♣ JT8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, you need a little good fortune on the first trick. After that, you have two chances to make the contract. You want to combine the chances whenever possible. When combining chances, you may have to take them in the right order.

Here, if you were to start with the club finesse and it lost, you wouldn't have an opportunity to fall back on the diamonds since the defenders would take their heart winners. By starting with the diamonds, you can fall back on the club finesse if the ♦Q doesn't fall. Two chances are better than one. Even though the odds in the diamond suit aren't as good as those in the club suit, on this deal the diamond suit comes through for declarer.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/21)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/19)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/21#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.