---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-21'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/21'

next:
  text: '2024-10-23'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/23'
---

# 2024-10-22

Your decisions will have a big impact on the deal.

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 972<br>♥ K83<br>♦ 862<br>♣ T987</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make.

With only 3 high-card points and a balanced hand, you don't have anything to say except pass.

West passes. Your partner, North, opens the bidding 1♠. East overcalls 1NT. The auction is back to you.

Even with three-card support for spades, you don't have enough to take any action.

West raises to 3NT. Partner and East both pass. You have one more opportunity to make a call.

Naturally, you pass once more, ending the auction. You now have to choose an opening lead against East's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

If you had no help from the auction, you would tend to lead the ♣10, top of the solid sequence in your longest suit. However, partner opened the bidding 1♠. You should usually lead partner's suit unless you clearly have something better to do. Here, you don't have anything clearly better to do.

Having decided to lead partner's suit, you have your next decision. Which card should you lead?

With three or more cards in partner's suit, you generally lead low, fourth best if you have four or more. The only exception would be if you had raised partner's suit. Then you might lead the top of nothing. Here, you haven't raised partner's suit, so you want to lead low. You don't want partner to think you have only a doubleton spade.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♠2, and West puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J4<br>♥ J64<br>♦ KJT5<br>♣ A532</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 972<br>♥ K83<br>♦ 862<br>♣ T987</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays a low spade from dummy, partner wins the trick with the ♠A, and declarer follows with the ♠10. Partner returns the ♠5, and declarer wins this trick with the ♠Q.

Declarer now leads a low heart. You have another decision. What are you playing to this trick?

The standard guideline in this situation is second hand low. You don't want to waste your high card on two of declarer's low cards.

Let's see what will happen if you do play low. Suppose you play a low heart. Declarer plays the ♥J from dummy, and partner wins the trick with the ♥A. Partner leads the ♠3, and declarer wins the ♠K as you follow with your last spade.

Declarer leads the ♥Q. This time, you win with the ♥K. Unfortunately, you have no spades left to lead. Suppose you try leading a club. Declarer wins with dummy's ♣A as partner plays the ♣J.

Here are the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 86<br>♥ <br>♦ 9743<br>♣ K</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ 6<br>♦ KJT5<br>♣ 53</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ T97<br>♦ AQ<br>♣ Q6</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ 8<br>♦ 862<br>♣ 987</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With the hearts established, declarer has the rest of the tricks. Declarer finishes with two spades, three hearts, a club, and four diamonds, making an overtrick.

Partner has two established spade winners, but you couldn't reach partner's hand. Too bad partner didn't have the ♣A instead of the ♣K. Despite that, was there something you could have done?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♠2. Partner wins the first trick with the ♠A as declarer follows with the ♠10. Partner returns the ♠5, and declarer wins the trick with the ♠Q. Declarer leads a low heart toward dummy. You are at the critical point in the defense.

Before automatically playing second hand low, you need to consider what is going on. It looks as though declarer still has the ♠K. Partner won the first trick with the and would have won with the ♠K, only as high as necessary if holding that card. Why is declarer leading a heart?

Declarer presumably needs to establish one or more winners in the heart suit. If declarer held the ♥A and ♥Q, declarer would likely have tried a finesse, so partner must hold one of those cards. If you play low, partner can win the trick and finish establishing the spade winners.

You will later be able to gain the lead with the ♥K, but you won't have any spades left to lead. But what if partner doesn't have a quick entry in either clubs or diamonds?

Declarer will likely have enough tricks to make the contract.

So it's up to you to use your entry now to finish establishing partner's spade suit.

Rise with the ♥K!

This wins the trick as dummy and partner follow with low hearts. Now you can lead another spade. As you expected, declarer wins this trick with the ♠K.

Declarer still doesn't have enough tricks to make the contract. Declarer leads another heart, and this time partner wins the ♥A. That's partner's entry.

Partner now takes one of the spade winners you helped establish. Partner takes another trick with the last spade. That's the fifth trick for the defense.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but you have defeated the contract. Your side got two heart tricks and three spade tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A8653<br>♥ A5<br>♦ 9743<br>♣ KJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J4<br>♥ J64<br>♦ KJT5<br>♣ A532</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KQT<br>♥ QT972<br>♦ AQ<br>♣ Q64</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 972<br>♥ K83<br>♦ 862<br>♣ T987</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, you had to lead partner's suit to defeat the contract. If you led anything except a spade, declarer would make the contract. You also had to lead a low spade. Leading a low spade told partner you had three or more spades. Partner could see that at least two more spade tricks could be established by continuing the suit. If you had led a high spade, partner would assume you started with either a singleton or a doubleton spade. Then partner wouldn't see any future in continuing with spades since declarer would have at least three winners in the suit. Partner would likely try switching to another suit.

Finally, you have to follow the principle of keeping an entry with the suit you are trying to establish. You need to use your entry first, while you still have a spade to lead. That preserves partner's entry for after the spades have been established.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/22)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/15)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/22#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.