---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-23'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/23'

next:
  text: '2024-10-25'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/25'
---

# 2024-10-24

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q4<br>♥ AK75<br>♦ Q9632<br>♣ Q4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

There are 13 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. That puts you in the minimum-strength category for an opening bid at the one level. You start with the long minor suit.

After you open 1♦, the auction skyrockets! West makes a preemptive jump overcall to 5♣. Partner, North, not to be outdone, raises you to 6♦. East passes, and you have to decide what to do after all this excitement.

It sounds as though partner was jammed by West's actions and, with the Blackwood convention no longer available, had to choose whether or not to bid slam. With nothing much extra for the opening bid, you can't do anything more except pass and wait to see dummy.

West passes, and you are now the declarer in 6♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>5♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>6♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣J, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKT753<br>♥ Q62<br>♦ AKT<br>♣ 5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q4<br>♥ AK75<br>♦ Q9632<br>♣ Q4</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The bidding was so fast and furious that spades never got mentioned. However, your task is to take twelve tricks with diamonds as trumps.

You start by considering the potential losers. There is one potential diamond loser since you are missing the ♦J. There are no spade losers, but you will be left with a potential heart loser in your hand after the ♥A, ♥K, and ♥Q are gone. You also start with two potential club losers. So there are four potential losers: one diamond, one heart, and two clubs.

There will be no problem in diamonds if the five missing diamonds are divided 3-2 or the ♦J falls singleton. If East started with four diamonds including the ♦J, you could plan to take a finesse against the ♦J. If West started with four diamonds, it will be too late to take a finesse against the ♦J after East shows out on the second round.

There are a couple of ways to potentially avoid the heart loser. If the defenders' six hearts are divided exactly 3-3, the last heart in your hand will be a winner. If that doesn't work, you can discard the fourth heart on dummy's extra spade winner. Or you might plan on ruffing the fourth round of hearts in dummy, although that would require delaying drawing all the defenders' trumps.

To eliminate the second club loser, you could plan to discard it on dummy's extra spade winner or ruff it in dummy.

So there doesn't seem to be a problem if the suits behave well. You have to lose the first club trick, but then you can ruff a club in dummy, draw trumps, and discard the fourth heart on dummy's extra spade winner if need be. You might even plan to discard both the heart and club losers on dummy's spade suit. Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣J. You play low from dummy and East wins the first trick with the ♣A. East returns the ♣9. You play the ♣Q and West plays the ♣K. You can't afford to lose any more tricks, so you ruff with dummy's ♦10. That takes care of the club loser.

Now all you have to do is draw the defenders' trumps. You will then have the rest of the tricks, discarding the heart loser on dummy's extra spade winner if necessary. Both defenders follow when you play the ♦A. You continue with the ♦K. East follows suit, but West shows out. That's not good. The defenders' trumps have divided 4-1 and East still has the ♦J-8 remaining. Since you have no diamonds left in dummy and can't take a finesse against East's ♦J, it looks as though the slam is going to go down one. Unlucky.

Is there anything you can do?

Let's take another look.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♣J, and East wins the first trick with the ♣A. East returns another club, and you are forced to ruff it with dummy's ♦10. You draw the defenders' trumps by leading dummy's ♦A. Both defenders follow suit, but no ♦J appears. You continue with the ♦K and get the bad news. East follows suit, but West shows out. The defenders' diamonds have divided 4-1. East still has the ♦J-8 remaining. What can you do now?

Let's look at the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKT753<br>♥ Q62<br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ 983<br>♦ <br>♣ T8763</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J982<br>♥ JT4<br>♦ J8<br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q4<br>♥ AK75<br>♦ Q96<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

To make the contract, you need to avoid a diamond loser even though you can't take a diamond finesse. The only way you can do that is to arrange to be leading a card from dummy at trick twelve when East still has the ♦J-8 remaining and you have the ♦Q-9. Whatever you lead from dummy, East will be forced to play one of the diamonds and you can overruff. To accomplish that, you first have to get rid of one of your diamonds so that you will have only two diamonds left at the end, the same number as East. The only way to do that is to ruff one of dummy's spades.

Let's see how that will work on the actual deal. The first step is to cross to your hand with the ♠Q. Next, you cross back to dummy with a high spade. West shows out on this trick, so you know East started with four spades. That will make it easy to ruff a spade and establish dummy's remaining spades as winners. Exactly what you want. You can first take dummy's remaining high spade, discarding a low heart from your hand. You lead a spade from dummy and, when East follows with the you ruff with the ♦6. That accomplishes two things. First, it gets you down to the same number of trumps as East. Second, it establishes all of dummy's remaining spades as winners.

You get back to dummy with the ♥Q. Now you lead one of dummy's spade winners. What can East do?

If East ruffs, you can overruff, draw East's last trump, and take the last two tricks with your heart winners. East elects to discard a heart. That's okay. You can discard one of your hearts and remain in dummy. You continue with dummy's last spade winner, and East is forced with the same dilemma. If East ruffs, you will overruff and take the last two tricks with your remaining diamond and heart winners. East again chooses to discard a heart, but you can also discard a heart, keeping the lead in dummy. You can see why it was important to get rid of your extra trump. If you still had three diamonds, you would have to ruff this trick and would be in your hand with two tricks to go instead of in the dummy.

Now you are exactly where you want to be at trick twelve. You are in the dummy and both you and East have two trumps remaining. You lead a heart from dummy and, this time, East has no choice but to play a diamond. You can overruff. It's exactly as if you were taking a finesse. You play the ♦Q, dropping East's remaining ♦J. That's it!

You've made your slam contract, losing only the club trick you had to lose. Despite the 4-1 diamond break, you didn't lose any diamond tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKT753<br>♥ Q62<br>♦ AKT<br>♣ 5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ 983<br>♦ 4<br>♣ KJT87632</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J982<br>♥ JT4<br>♦ J875<br>♣ A9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q4<br>♥ AK75<br>♦ Q9632<br>♣ Q4</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The technique used to make this contract is a trump coup. The trick to executing a trump coup is to first reduce to the same trump length as the opponent and then be leading from the hand facing the trump length at trick twelve. This assumes that the player with the outstanding trumps does not trump a winner earlier which you can overtrump.

Interestingly enough, you can make 6♦ on this deal despite the 4-1 break in the diamond suit but you can't make 6♠ because of the 4-1 break in the spade suit.

Bridge can be a strange game!

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/24)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/21)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/25)

### By Date

Use the links below.