---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-24'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/24'

next: false
---

# 2024-10-25

On this deal, what's your best choice of handling a key suit?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K85<br>♥ T87<br>♦ AQ762<br>♣ T8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 1♦. You have to decide what call to make.

You have 9 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. If East had opened 1♣, you might have overcalled 1♦. With East opening in diamonds, however, there's nothing to do except pass at this point.

West passes. Partner, North, now jumps to 3♣ in the balancing position. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Although a jump overcall is usually preemptive when it's directly over an opponent's bid, that's not the standard agreement in the balancing position. With a weak hand, partner could simply pass and leave the opponent to play in 1♦. With a slightly stronger hand, partner could overcall 2♣. So partner's 3♣ is an intermediate jump overcall. It shows a good six- or seven-card club suit, with a hand worth about 15-17 points.

Partner has a source of tricks in clubs, you have two diamond stoppers - and hopefully West will lead opener's suit - and your ♠K looks to be favorably located with the opening bidder on your right. You are a little concerned about hearts, but partner presumably has some strength outside the club suit. You should have as reasonable a play for nine tricks as in clubs. So let's go with an aggressive call of 3NT.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥5, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A97<br>♥ Q43<br>♦ 9<br>♣ AQJ943</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K85<br>♥ T87<br>♦ AQ762<br>♣ T8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has 13 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card club suit, about what you might expect.

You were hoping West would lead a diamond, the suit East opened, giving you two tricks right away. West has surprised you a little by leading a heart instead of a diamond, attacking your weakest suit.

Before playing to the first trick, you need to first count the sure winners you have. How many do you have?

There are two sure spade tricks, the ♠A and ♠K. There are no sure heart tricks. The opponents have all the high hearts except the ♥Q. Despite all the strength and length in clubs, you start with only one immediate winner, the ♣A. There is only one sure diamond trick, the ♦A. So that's a total of only four immediate tricks: two spades, a club, and a diamond. You are going to need five more.

You aren't getting any more tricks from spades.

In hearts, West has led the ♥5. You might get a trick if West holds the ♥A-K and you choose to play dummy's ♥Q at trick one. Alternatively, if West has led from a suit including the ♥A-J or ♥K-J and you play low from dummy at trick one, East will have to win with the ♥K or ♥A and you can get a trick by leading toward dummy's ♥Q.

If West holds the ♣K, you will be able to get five additional tricks with the help of a finesse, trapping West's ♣K. Even if East holds the ♣K and the finesse loses, you will have established four additional club winners.

You can also get an extra trick in diamonds with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♦K. That looks quite likely given that East opened the bidding 1♦.

So you have two spade tricks, five or six club tricks, one or two diamond tricks, and perhaps even a heart trick. That should be enough to make the contract unless something goes wrong. Are there any potential problems?

West has led a heart. If the defenders can take five heart tricks right away, you could go down before you even get started. Even if they can only take three or four heart tricks, you will be in trouble if you lose too many tricks in the other suits while developing your winners.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥5. You are immediately faced with your first decision. Which heart are you playing from dummy?

If West holds both the ♥A and ♥K, you can get an immediate heart trick by playing dummy's ♥Q. However, if West has the ♥J, with or without a higher honor, if you play low at trick one, East will have to play the ♥A or ♥K. That would leave you with a sure stopper in hearts, and perhaps a trick if West holds the other high honor.

There are two reasons to play low from dummy to the first trick. First, playing low is best when West has one specific card, namely the ♥J. Playing the ♥Q requires West to have two specific cards, both the ♥A and the ♥K. It's twice as likely West has just one particular card instead of two! You have information from the auction that indicates West isn't likely to hold both the ♥A and ♥K. West passed as responder, typically showing fewer than 6 points. Holding both the ♥A and ♥K, West would have 7 points, more than enough to respond something.

Based on these deductions, you play low from dummy at trick one. East wins the ♥J. Did you miscalculate? No. East next plays the ♥A, winning the second trick. It didn't matter which heart you played from dummy at trick one. East continues with the ♥2, and West wins the trick with the ♥K. That's good news and bad news. There's only one heart remaining, so the defenders can't take the first five tricks. If West had started with five hearts, however, East wouldn't have a third heart to lead and the defenders could take only the first two heart tricks. West takes a fourth trick with the remaining heart, the ♥9. You discard low spades from both hands, as East discards a low diamond.

West now leads the ♠J. You play low from dummy and win the trick with the ♠K. You've lost four tricks and can't afford to lose any more. So what next?

To make your contract, you will need to make use dummy's club suit. Typically, in this situation, you would plan to take a club finesse, hoping West holds the ♣K. You would lead the ♣10, finessing if West plays low. If that works, you can continue with the repeating the finesse. You will still need a bit more luck, since you can't trap the ♣K if West started with four or more clubs.

You lead the ♣10, West follows with a low club, and you play dummy's ♣3. Unfortunately, East wins the trick with the ♣K.

East returns the ♦10. You can simply win the ♦A since all of dummy's clubs are now winners. There's no need to try the diamond finesse.

Even though you have the rest of the tricks, the opponents already took five tricks. 3NT is down one.

Let's go back and see what you might have done.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥5. You correctly play low from dummy and East wins the first trick with the ♥J. East takes a second trick with the ♥A. East then continues with a third heart to West's ♥K. West takes one more trick with the remaining heart, the ♥9. West leads the ♠J and you win with the ♠K. You have lost four tricks and can't afford to lose any more. What is your plan for taking the rest of the tricks?

You can no longer afford to lose a club trick, even if it could promote all the remaining clubs into winners. That would be the fifth trick for the defense. If you can win all six club tricks, however, the rest will be easy. You've won one trick and have the ♣A and ♦A. You don't even need to risk a diamond finesse. How should you handle the club suit to take all six tricks?

One possibility is to finesse against the hoped-for ♣K in the West hand. As long as West did not start with four clubs including the ♣K, you would take all six club tricks. However, before settling on that plan, you need to review all the clues.

Let's start with the auction. East opened the bidding, and West passed as responder. What does that tell you?

You expect East to have 12 or more points and West to have no more than 5 high-card points. What has West shown up with so far?

West won the third heart trick with the ♥K. West has also led the ♠J at trick five. That's a total of 4 high-card points. If West also has the ♣K, that would give West a total of at least 7 points.

So East must hold the ♣K!

A club finesse is destined to lose. Is there an alternative?

You lead the ♣10, and West plays a low club. What do you play from dummy?

The ♣A!

There's no point in taking a finesse that you "know" is going to lose. Your detective work is rewarded! East follows with the ♣K! East started with a singleton ♣K. That's pretty lucky, but you have no choice but to hope that's the situation.

You now have the rest of the tricks. You've made the 3NT contract with two spade tricks, a diamond trick, and six club tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A97<br>♥ Q43<br>♦ 9<br>♣ AQJ943</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ JT4<br>♥ K965<br>♦ J5<br>♣ 7652</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q632<br>♥ AJ2<br>♦ KT843<br>♣ K</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K85<br>♥ T87<br>♦ AQ762<br>♣ T8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Although dropping the ♣K was a slim chance, it was better than none. If the ♣K had not appeared, you would have continued with another high club and accepted going down one.

Is it possible that West might have held the ♣K?

Sometimes, opponents act in surprising ways. East might have opened very light and West might have passed holding 7 points. If that happens, you must simply shrug philosophically. You'll win much more in the long run by playing detective.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/25)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/24)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/25#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.