---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-27'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/27'

next: false
---

# 2024-10-28

In this deal, should you go with the odds?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ975<br>♥ A5<br>♦ QJ5<br>♣ 762</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South with your side vulnerable and the opponents not vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens the bidding 3♥. Partner, North, makes a takeout double, and East passes. You have your first chance to make a call.

You have 12 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. With partner showing the values for a takeout double at the three level, you have more than enough to advance to game. You can take the partnership right to game in spades, 4♠.

Everyone passes and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♠ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>3♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥K, and dummy comes down with four-card support for spades and 15 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton heart. More than enough for the takeout double.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT83<br>♥ J7<br>♦ AK9<br>♣ A854</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ975<br>♥ A5<br>♦ QJ5<br>♣ 762</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In planning the play in a suit contract, you start by considering the potential losers you have. There is a potential spade loser since you are missing the ♠Q. There will be a heart loser remaining once the ♥A driven out. There will be two club losers remaining once the ♣A is driven out. There are no diamond losers since you have all the top honors in the suit. That's a total of four potential losers: one spade, one heart, and two clubs. That's one more than you can afford. You need to look for a way to eliminate at least one of the losers.

There is no way to avoid either the heart loser or the two club losers.

You need to avoid the spade loser. With nine spades in the combined hand, the odds favor playing the ♠A and ♠K, hoping the ♠Q will fall singleton or doubleton, rather than taking a finesse. That follows the guideline of eight ever, nine never. Let's see if the guideline is good enough on this deal.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥K. Dummy and East follow with low hearts and you win the ♥A. There's no reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. A low spade is played to dummy's ♠K. Both defenders follow with low spades. No singleton ♠Q. A low spade is played from dummy and, when East follows with a low spade, you play the ♠A, following the "eight ever, nine never" guideline. Unfortunately, West shows out, discarding a heart. The defenders' spades have divided 3-1 and East has a winner left with the ♠Q.

You have to lose a heart trick. West leads a diamond and you can take the three diamond winners. West discards a heart on the third round. You play a club to dummy's ♣A. You give up a club trick, hoping the defenders will win and lead either a heart or a diamond, which would allow you to ruff in dummy and discard the club loser from your hand.

East wins the club. East take the defenders' spade winner. Unfortunately, West takes the defenders' fourth trick with another club winner.

You have the last two tricks with the remaining trumps, but the contract is down one. You lost one spade, one heart, and two clubs.

Should you have done something differently?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥K. A low heart is played from dummy, East plays a low heart, and you win the first trick with the ♥A.

In isolation, the best play in the spade suit is to play the ♠A-K, hoping the will fall singleton or doubleton. This follows the guideline saying with eight combined cards it's best to take the finesse - ever - and with nine combined cards not to finesse - never.

However, "ever" and "never" are not rules, only guidelines. You need to take the auction and play into consideration.

On this deal, West opened the bidding 3♥, showing a seven-card suit, leaving East with only two. That impacts the odds. West holds only six unknown cards and East holds eleven.

That shifts the odds in favor of East holding three, or even four, spades.

You lead a low spade to dummy's ♠K, just in case West started with a void in spades. West, however, follows with a low spade, and so does East. No singleton ♠Q. You lead a spade from dummy and East follows with a low spade. No doubleton with East. You are at the critical point in the play. Going with the "revised odds", based on West's preemptive opening bid, you finesse the rather than playing for the to drop.

Success! West shows out, discarding a heart. The spades have divided 3-1. The ♠A draws East's remaining trump, the ♠Q. You can take the three diamond winners. West discards a heart on the third round. You take a trick with the ♣A. You give up a heart trick to West's ♥Q.

West leads the ♣J and East wins the ♣Q. East takes another club trick with the ♣K. However, that's the last trick for the defense.

You have the last two tricks with the remaining trumps and have made the contract. You lost a heart and two clubs, but that's all.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT83<br>♥ J7<br>♦ AK9<br>♣ A854</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 2<br>♥ KQT9632<br>♦ 82<br>♣ J93</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q64<br>♥ 84<br>♦ T7643<br>♣ KQT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJ975<br>♥ A5<br>♦ QJ5<br>♣ 762</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The guideline "eight ever, nine never" may seem a little confusing. When you are missing four cards, the odds favor them dividing 3-1. However, the guideline only applies after you have played one high honor and led a second round and the next player follows suit. That eliminates half the 3-1 breaks, so the odds now shift in favor of a 2-2 break and playing the second high honor to drop the queen.

"Eight ever, nine never" is only a guideline, however. When an opponent shows a long suit, it shifts the odds, as on this deal.

When East follows to the second round of spades, the odds now favor taking the finesse. Another slight indicator in favor of taking the finesse is West has shown a weak hand. That makes it more likely East holds most of the missing high cards outside of hearts, and that includes the ♠Q.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/28)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/26)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/28#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.