---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-28'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/28'

next: false
---

# 2024-10-29

In today's deal, how can you help partner defeat the contract?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 9843<br>♥ 9832<br>♦ 92<br>♣ 762</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens 1NT, showing a balanced hand with about 15-17 points. Your partner, North, passes, and East raises to 3NT. You have to decide what call to make.

This one is easy. With not a single high-card point, there's nothing to do except pass.

West and partner both pass. West is now the declarer in 3NT with partner on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♥5, and East puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q65<br>♥ JT<br>♦ QJT65<br>♣ AQ5</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 9843<br>♥ 9832<br>♦ 92<br>♣ 762</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The ♥10 is played from dummy. Despite holding a weak hand, you have a key decision to make. What are you playing to this trick?

With no heart higher than the ♥9, it might seem that you should make a discouraging attitude signal.

Let's see what will happen if you do. Suppose you play the ♥2 to the first trick. Dummy's ♥10 wins as declarer follows with the ♥7. The ♦Q is led from dummy, you play low, declarer plays low, and partner wins the ♦K.

Partner switches to the ♣J. Declarer plays low from dummy. You make another discouraging signal with the ♣2, and declarer wins the ♣K.

Declarer now takes the next nine tricks, four diamonds, two more clubs, and three spades. In fact, if you discard a spade, declarer will take all remaining tricks.

You can see that the contract might have been defeated if partner had continued leading hearts. Why did partner switch to a club after winning the ♦K?

When you played a low heart at trick one, partner assumed declarer still held the ♥K and at least one more heart. If that were the case, partner was hoping to get to your hand so you could lead a heart, trapping declarer's ♥K. How could you have helped partner on this deal?

Let's go back to the first trick.

## Another Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♥5 and declarer plays the ♥10 from dummy. Is it necessary to give partner a discouraging attitude signal in this situation?

No!

Since you can't play a heart higher than dummy's ♥10, partner already knows your attitude toward hearts... you don't have any helpful high cards! What information might be more useful to partner?

Since an attitude signal is unnecessary, you should give a count signal in this situation!

If you can tell partner how many hearts you hold, partner can figure out how many hearts declarer holds and defend accordingly. Which heart should you play?

The ♥9!

Playing standard signals, you want to start a high-low count signal to show an even number of cards. When giving a count signal, you want to make it as clear as possible by playing the highest card you can afford. Here you can afford the ♥9. If you were to signal with the ♥8 - or worse, the ♥3 - partner would assume declarer holds the ♥9. When declarer follows to the first trick with the ♥7, partner would assume declarer still holds the ♥9 along with the ♥K. Partner may not be certain whether you have two or four hearts - or even a singleton ♥9 - but partner will at least be aware of the possibility that you hold four hearts headed by the ♥9.

After winning the ♥10, declarer tries a diamond finesse, which loses to partner's ♦K. Bad news for declarer; good news for your side.

Now you'll see whether partner got your message at trick one. Partner leads the ♥A! Partner has concluded from your signal that the best chance of defeating the contract is to hope you started with four hearts. The ♥J falls from dummy, you finish the high-low count signal, and declarer's ♥K falls on this trick. Partner continues with the ♥Q. With declarer's ♥K falling on the previous trick, that's a great sign. Partner apparently started with five hearts. A low spade is discarded from dummy. Careful! You have another critical play to make.

Suppose you follow with the ♥3. Let's see what will happen. Declarer discards a low club. Partner continues with the ♥4 and you win the trick with the ♥8 as dummy discards a club and declarer a diamond. Unfortunately, you are now on lead.

Whatever you lead next, declarer will win and take the rest of the tricks. Partner has the setting trick, the ♥6, but there's no entry to it.

So let's go back once more to see what you should have done.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♥5, declarer plays the ♥10 from dummy, and you give a clear count signal by playing the ♥9. Dummy's ♥10 wins the trick as declarer follows with the ♥7. Declarer tries the diamond finesse, losing to partner's ♦K. Partner leads the ♥A. The ♥J falls from dummy, and declarer's ♥K falls. Partner continues with the ♥Q.

With the fall of declarer's ♥K on the previous trick, you know partner started with five hearts and declarer has none left. You're expecting partner to take enough heart tricks to defeat the contract and you don't want to get in partner's way.

Unblock the ♥8 on this trick!

As you've seen, you don't want to be left with the highest heart for your side. Partner continues with the ♥6, and this wins the trick as you play the ♥3. Partner is still on lead and takes another heart trick with the ♥4.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but you have defeated the 3NT contract. Partner took four heart tricks and the ♦K.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ JT<br>♥ AQ654<br>♦ K8<br>♣ JT93</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK72<br>♥ K7<br>♦ A743<br>♣ K84</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q65<br>♥ JT<br>♦ QJT65<br>♣ AQ5</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 9843<br>♥ 9832<br>♦ 92<br>♣ 762</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When you pick up a weak hand on defense, it's easy to sit back and feel you aren't particularly involved in the outcome.

Indeed, on this deal, it was your partner who took all five tricks for the defense. However, that doesn't mean you didn't have to make two critical plays to help partner defeat the contract. First, you had to make a clear count signal at trick one by playing the ♥9. That encouraged partner to hope that you started with four hearts so that declarer's ♥K would be falling on the second round of the suit. Second, you had to unblock the ♥8 so partner could take all the established heart winners.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/29)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/22)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/29#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.