---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-30'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/30'

next:
  text: '2024-11-01'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/01'
---

# 2024-10-31

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ54<br>♥ A54<br>♦ K74<br>♣ QJ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

There are 17 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. Although the hand is balanced, it's too strong for 1NT when the partnership range is 15-17 points. You start with the five-card major, planning to show the extra strength at your next opportunity.

West passes, and partner, North, makes a limit raise to 3♠. This is invitational, showing four-card or longer support for spades and about 10-12 points. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

With 18 points, you have more than enough to accept the invitation and continue to 4♠. With partner limited to at most 12 points, there's not enough combined strength to consider a slam.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>3♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥3, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T986<br>♥ K62<br>♦ QJ<br>♣ A742</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ54<br>♥ A54<br>♦ K74<br>♣ QJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In making a plan for a suit contract, you start by considering the potential losers. There is one potential trump loser since you are missing the ♠K. You'll be left with a heart loser after the ♥A and ♥K are gone. There's a potential club loser since the opponents hold the ♣K. There's also a sure diamond loser since you are missing the ♦A. So there are four potential losers, one in each suit. You need to eliminate one of them.

You can't do anything about the diamond loser, but you might be able to avoid the spade loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♠K. The odds of East holding the ♠K are 50%.

Similarly, you may be able to avoid the club loser with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♣K. The odds of West holding the ♣K are 50%.

So you will make the contract if either the spade finesse or the club finesse works. That's a combined chance of 75%. Is there any way to improve on that?

Another possibility is to discard the heart loser. If you can do that, it won't matter whether both finesses lose, you'll still make the contract.

There are two ways that might be accomplished. If you try the club finesse and it loses, you will have established an extra winner. After taking a trick with the remaining club honor in your hand, you can discard a heart on dummy's ♣A. Similarly, if you drive out the ♦A, you will have an extra diamond winner. After taking a trick with dummy's remaining diamond honor, you can discard one of dummy's hearts on your ♦K. You can then ruff your heart loser in dummy.

So, there are several possibilities for making the contract. Which line of play is best?

Let's first look at what will happen if you were to start with the spade finesse.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥3. If you decide to start with the spade finesse, you would win the first heart with dummy's ♥K. You now try the spade finesse but, unfortunately, it loses to West's ♠K.

West continues with another heart, and East's ♥J drives out your ♥A. The defenders have now established their heart winner. So everything is going to depend on the club finesse. If it works, you will make the contract. If it loses, you will go down since the opponents will be able to take their heart trick and you still have the ♦A to lose.

You draw another round of trumps with the and both defenders follow suit. All the missing trumps are gone. You can now try the club finesse. When you lead the ♣Q, however, it loses to East's ♣K.

Unfortunately, East has another heart to lead and the opponents take their third trick. West takes one more trick with the ♦A.

4♠ is down one.

So, trying the spade finesse first leaves you with only the 75% chance of making the contract. You will need either the spade finesse or the club finesse to work. To improve the odds, you must focus on eliminating the heart loser first.

Let's see if trying the club finesse improves the outcome.

## Another Possible Play

West has led the ♥3. If you decide to start with the club finesse, you would win the first heart with the ♥A. You try the club finesse and it loses to East's ♣K. However, you've now established an extra club winner on which you can discard your heart loser.

But there's a problem. East returns a heart, driving out dummy's ♥K. The club winners are blocked.

To unblock the clubs, you have to play a low club to the winner in your hand. Unfortunately, the ♣A is there in dummy, and there's no immediate entry to it. If you lead a diamond, the opponents will win and take their heart winner. You're back to relying on the spade finesse.

On this deal, you've seen the spade finesse won't work. Down one again.

So, starting with the club finesse is no better than starting with the spade finesse. You won't be able to eliminate the heart loser if the finesse loses. The chance of making the contract is still only 75%.

To improve the odds, you are going to have to start with the diamonds.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♥3.

If you decide to start with the diamond suit, it won't matter in which hand you win the first trick. Let's assume you win in your hand with the ♥A. You lead a diamond, and West makes a good play by winning the first trick with the ♦A. Your diamond winners are now blocked.

West makes another good play by leading a heart to drive out dummy's ♥K. The defenders have established their heart winner.

You unblock the diamond suit by taking dummy's ♦Q. You need to get back to your hand to take your other diamond winner. You lead a spade from dummy, and East follows with a low spade. Should you try the spade finesse?

No!

You don't want to undo all the good work you've done so far and put the contract at risk. You win the ♠A, and West follows with a low spade. You take your established diamond winner and discard the heart from dummy. Your heart loser can be safely ruffed in dummy.

You still have a spade to lose. You're happy to see West win the ♠K. You would have gone down if you tried the spade finesse. West leads a low club. With all the trumps gone, you can afford to try the club finesse for an overtrick. It doesn't work on the actual deal, so it was important not to rely on either the spade finesse or club finesse. The 75% line of play wouldn't work.

You have the rest of the tricks, making the 4♠ contract. You lost a spade, a club, and a diamond, but no heart trick.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T986<br>♥ K62<br>♦ QJ<br>♣ A742</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K3<br>♥ QT83<br>♦ A862<br>♣ T83</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 72<br>♥ J97<br>♦ T953<br>♣ K965</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJ54<br>♥ A54<br>♦ K74<br>♣ QJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, you need to carefully consider the various options. Although your heart loser is initially a slow loser, it will become a fast loser if the opponents gain the lead twice before you can eliminate it. You don't have "time" to take the spade finesse. If it loses and the opponents lead another heart, you will go down if the club finesse also loses.

Since both minor suits are blocked after you lose the first trick in either suit, you need to consider your entries. If you start with the club suit and the finesse loses, you won't have an entry to reach the winner you need. Instead, you must start with the diamond suit. That improves the odds to almost 100%. The opponents can't prevent you from reaching your established winner after you unblock the suit.

Getting rid of a slow loser usually boils down to winning a race. Can the opponents establish a trick in your slow loser suit before you can get rid of the loser safely?

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/10/31)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/28)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/02)

### By Date

Use the links below.