---
prev:
  text: '2025-03-02'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/02'

next:
  text: '2025-03-04'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/04'
---

# 2025-03-03

In today's column, what's the best chance to make the contract?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K84<br>♥ AQJT84<br>♦ AK<br>♣ A9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. North and South are vulnerable, and East and West are not. As dealer there is a chance to choose an opening call.

With 21 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit, this hand is too strong to open the bidding at the one level and risk being left to play there. You can open with a strong artificial 2♣ bid.

West passes. North responds 2♦, an artificial waiting bid. East passes. It is time to select a rebid.

You can now describe the hand by bidding 2♥. This shows an unbalanced hand with a five-card or longer heart suit. It is forcing, so there is no need to jump.

West passes. North makes a jump raise to 4♥. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Partner's raise to 4♥ shows heart support but a weak hand with no ace, king, singleton, or void on the side. With some side values, partner would raise to only 3♥, leaving room to explore for slam. Opposite a weak raise you don't have enough to consider going any higher.

West passes. The auction has ended and you are now the declarer in 4♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦J.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 76<br>♥ K53<br>♦ 86432<br>♣ J62</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K84<br>♥ AQJT84<br>♦ AK<br>♣ A9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has three-card heart support, including the ♥K, but not much else.

Making 4♥ will require ten tricks.

In a suit contract, begin by counting potential losers. There are no heart losers since you have the top five honors in the suit. There are three potential spade losers since the defenders hold all the top spade honors other than the ♠K. There are no diamond losers. You can ruff any further rounds of diamonds once the ♦A and ♦K are gone. There will be one club loser remaining after the ♣A is gone. That's a total of four losers: three spades and one club. One more loser than you can afford. Time to Browse Declarer's Checklist for ways to eliminate a loser.

You might be able to avoid a spade loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♠A. That's a 50% chance. You might also be able to ruff a spade loser in dummy after two rounds of spades have been played.

It might be possible to establish two extra diamond winners in dummy if the six missing diamonds are divided 3-3. That's against the odds, and you would also need two heart entries to dummy to ruff a third round of diamonds and then reach the winners. That would require the missing hearts to be divided 2-2, further reducing the chances.

So it looks as though the best plan is to rely on the spade finesse working and, if it doesn't, ruffing a spade loser in dummy.

Is that going to be good enough?

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦J. A low diamond is played from dummy, East plays a low diamond, and you choose to win the ♦A.

To try the spade finesse, the only entry to dummy is the ♥K. Suppose you play a low heart to dummy's ♥K. Both defenders follow with low hearts. There are only two more hearts outstanding. You take advantage of the entry to lead a low spade to the ♠K, hoping East holds the ♠A. Unfortunately, West turns up with the ♠A. So much for that 50% chance. There's still the possibility of ruffing a spade loser in dummy.

West, however, leads a heart, removing one of dummy's remaining trumps. Bad news! East shows out, discarding a club. The trumps have divided 3-1 and West still has a trump remaining.

You give up a spade trick, hoping East will win. Unfortunately, West wins the trick. West still has a heart to lead, removing dummy's last trump. So much for the hope of ruffing a spade loser in the dummy.

There's not much you can do now but hope the opponents misdefend. You take two of the remaining heart winners. West discards diamonds and East discards clubs. You play the ♣A and another club. West's ♣Q and East's ♣K both fall on the second trick. Dummy's ♣J is now a winner, but there's no way to reach it unless the opponents help out.

West leads a diamond, and you are back in your hand. You take the last heart winner.

Both defenders have held on to their spades, so they take the last trick. The contract is down one, losing three spade tricks and one club trick. It's unfortunate the spade finesse lost, the hearts divided 3-1, and the defenders chose to remove dummy's trumps.

Was there anything which could be done?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♦J, and you win the first trick with the ♦A.

Although you could try the spade finesse, it isn't necessary.

As long as you can ruff the third round of spades in dummy, you will make the contract.

You can't afford to lead any trumps beforehand since the defenders might also lead trumps and remove all the hearts from dummy.

Let's see how the play should go.

At trick two, you lead a low spade.

You need to give up two spade tricks so you can ruff a spade in dummy.

West wins the trick. Seeing what you are trying to do, West leads a heart. You win in your hand as East follows with a low heart.

You give up another spade trick. West wins again. West leads another trump and you win as East shows out.

You are ahead of the game since there is still a trump left in dummy. You lead your last spade and ruff in dummy. You've eliminated the spade loser. You can get back to your hand with a club. You draw West's last trump. You have three more heart tricks to take. You have a diamond winner to take.

The defenders have the last club trick, but you have made the contract. You lost only two spade tricks and one club trick.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 76<br>♥ K53<br>♦ 86432<br>♣ J62</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ9<br>♥ 962<br>♦ JT97<br>♣ Q75</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ JT532<br>♥ 7<br>♦ Q5<br>♣ KT843</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K84<br>♥ AQJT84<br>♦ AK<br>♣ A9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When choosing among plans, declarer wants to go with the one offering the best odds. The spade finesse is a 50% chance. The odds are better than that since declarer will still be able to ruff a spade in dummy if the defenders' hearts divide 2-2 or the defenders don't lead trumps after winning the spade. Planning to ruff a spade loser in dummy, however, is a 100%, assuming neither defender holds a singleton diamond. After giving up the first spade and getting a heart shift, you can actually win the ♥K in dummy to give yourself the chance of leading toward the ♠K. This is relatively safe since it's doubtful you'll get overruffed if the finesse loses and you have to ruff the last spade in dummy.

The key is to assure the contract once you get a favorable opening lead. If West led a heart initially, the contract can actually be defeated. Don't give West a second chance by leading a heart yourself before leading a spade.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/03/03)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/02/28)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/03)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/03#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.