---
prev:
  text: '2025-03-03'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/03'

next:
  text: '2025-03-05'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/05'
---

# 2025-03-04

In today's deal, can your side take an established winner before it's too late?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J982<br>♥ T53<br>♦ 43<br>♣ A876</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens 1♣. Your partner, North, overcalls 1♦. East bids 1♥, promising four or more hearts. You have to decide whether to get involved in the auction.

You have only 5 high-card points. If you held a third diamond, you might consider a light advance to 2♦, and if you had more points, you might double to show four spades. But with the actual hand, you have no reason to bid.

West raises to 2♥ and partner passes. East leaps to 4♥ and it's your call again.

You have nothing to say at this point.

West and partner both pass, and the auction is over. You now have to choose an opening lead against East's 4♥ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

With a very attractive lead, such as a suit headed by the ace-king or a singleton, you might consider leading that. Here, you have nothing better to do than lead partner's suit. You only have a doubleton diamond, so there is a chance you may be able to get a ruff.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♦4, top of the doubleton, and dummy comes down. 

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q7<br>♥ A986<br>♦ K62<br>♣ QJ95</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J982<br>♥ T53<br>♦ 43<br>♣ A876</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Dummy is balanced with 12 high-card points and four-card support for East's hearts. Declarer plays low from dummy, and partner plays the ♦J. You hope this is from five diamonds headed by the ♦A-Q-J. if so, it will be easy to defeat the contract. No such luck. Declarer wins the ♦A. Partner's suit was only headed by the ♦Q-J.

Declarer begins drawing the defenders' trumps, starting with the ♥K. Both you and partner follow with low hearts. Declarer continues with a heart to the ♥A. You follow with a low heart and partner with the ♥J. East started with only a four-card heart suit. Declarer plays a heart to the ♥Q, drawing your remaining trump. On this trick, partner discards the ♦8. With trumps gone, declarer now leads a low club toward dummy. You are at the critical point in the defense.

In this situation, it is normal to play second hand low. If partner has the ♣K, you do not want to win this trick in case partner's ♣K is singleton. If declarer has the ♣K, you will be able to win the ♣A on the next round anyway. If the ♣Q wins this trick, declarer must have at least one more club, the ♣K. You may as well give partner a count signal by playing the starting a high-low sequence to show an even number.

Declarer plays the ♣Q from dummy and partner wins the ♣K. Partner now plays back the ♣4. You are glad partner did not try to find you with anything in spades. Declarer plays the ♣10. It is not clear who has the last club, partner or declarer, but there would be no reason to duck this trick. Dummy has the ♦K as an entry so you can never cut declarer off from the good clubs. If declarer started with only two clubs, you need to take this trick or you won't get it. Now that you are in again, playing a diamond seems like the best bet. Partner overcalled 1♦ and presumably has the ♦Q, since declarer won the first trick with the ♦A. Playing a diamond appears safe. Declarer wins with the ♦K.

Declarer takes the ♣J. Partner discards the ♠5 as you and declarer follow with low clubs. Declarer plays the ♣9. Partner discards the ♠3 and declarer the ♦10. That's unfortunate. Declarer has managed to get rid of a diamond loser.

Declarer concedes a trick to partner's ♠A but claims the rest, making the 4♥ contract. Unfortunately, declarer was able to discard a diamond loser on the clubs.

Was there anything you could have done?

Let's go back and see.

## Recommended Defense

At trick one, when you led a diamond, partner played the ♦J and declarer won the ♦A.

This trick was very informative. When trying to win the trick as third hand, partner will play the lowest of touching cards. Holding ♦Q-J, partner would play the ♦J. If partner had the ♦Q-J-10, partner would have played the ♦10, only as high as necessary. Partner's play of the ♦J means declarer has the ♦10. If partner started with only five diamonds, partner cannot lead a diamond when partner is able to regain the lead. If partner plays a low diamond, declarer can win the ♦10. If partner plays the ♦Q, declarer will win the ♦K in dummy and declarer's ♦10 will be high.

Ideally, you would like to get on lead and play a diamond through dummy's ♦K. If declarer plays low from dummy, partner will win the ♦Q. If declarer plays the ♦K, partner's ♦Q will be established as a winner. In the earlier defense, you did manage to establish partner's ♦Q, but it was too late. Declarer won the race by establishing extra club winners first. You needed to lead a diamond before dummy's clubs were established.

Declarer draws three rounds of trumps. On the third round of hearts, partner discards the ♦8. Declarer next leads a low club toward dummy. This is your opportunity.

Win the ♣A.

This goes against the principle of second hand low. However, you know it is important for you to be on lead after the first club trick. Partner cannot lead diamonds productively. That's your job.

You dutifully play your remaining diamond for partner's benefit. Declarer wins dummy's ♦K. Declarer tries another club but, this time, your side has won the race. Partner wins the ♣K... and takes the ♦Q as declarer follows with the ♦10. You discard a club. Clubs aren't good for anything anymore. Partner then takes the ♠A.

Declarer claims the rest of the tricks, but you have defeated the 4♥ contract with a spade, two clubs, and a diamond. Down one.

## The Finer Points

Here's one more consideration. When declarer leads the first low club toward dummy, one reason you might hesitate about immediately playing the ♣A is the danger that partner started with a singleton ♣K. You don't want to turn the partnership's two club winners into one by crashing them together. Is there any way you can know that partner has two or more clubs?

In the auction, partner overcalled in diamonds. If partner started with six or more diamonds, it would be pointless to rise with the ♣A and lead another diamond. Declarer wouldn't have any diamond losers anyway. How can you know for sure you need to get in quickly to play a diamond?

The answer lies in partner's first discard. You know partner likes diamonds. Partner overcalled and, at trick one, plays the ♦J, suggesting partner also has the ♦Q and declarer the ♦10. So partner's subsequent diamond discard should be a count signal since attitude is already known. Let's see.

You both follow to the first round of trumps. You also both follow to the second round of trumps. On the third round of trumps, partner discards the ♦8. What does this tell you about the diamond suit?

When giving a count signal, partner plays a card that corresponds to the current count - that is, the number of diamonds partner currently holds. The ♦8 is clearly a high card, so this is an even count signal, showing an even number of diamonds remaining. If partner started with six diamonds, there would be five remaining and partner would play a low diamond, showing an odd number of diamonds remaining in hand. So partner currently has four diamonds and must have started with five diamonds. You started with two and dummy started with three. That means declarer started with three diamonds and partner's ♦Q will win the third round if you can set it up in time. Furthermore, when giving a signal, partner tends to do it with as high a card as partner can afford. If partner held both the ♦9 and ♦8, partner would signal with the ♦9. Since partner played the ♦8, declarer must hold the ♦9 in addition to the ♦10 you already know declarer still holds.

How about partner having a singleton ♣K? Is that possible?

Again, you can use logic and counting to figure it out. From the count discard of the ♦8, you determine that partner started with five diamonds. Partner has turned up with only two hearts. If partner started with only one club, that would mean partner would have started with five spades. If that were the case, partner would surely have overcalled 1♠ instead of 1♦. So partner can't have a singleton ♣K when declarer leads a low club toward dummy.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A543<br>♥ J4<br>♦ QJ875<br>♣ K4</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q7<br>♥ A986<br>♦ K62<br>♣ QJ95</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KT6<br>♥ KQ72<br>♦ AT9<br>♣ T32</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J982<br>♥ T53<br>♦ 43<br>♣ A876</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Counting out the likely distribution when on defense is a lot of work, but it is one of your most powerful tools. Without knowing the count, you may still be able to guess that winning the first club is more likely to work than ducking it. Knowing the count, however, you can determine with certainty that it is the correct play.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/03/04)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/01)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/03)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/11)

### By Date

Use the links below.