---
prev:
  text: '2025-03-05'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/05'

next: false
---

# 2025-03-06

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT7654<br>♥ KQ32<br>♦ 2<br>♣ AT</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Neither side is vulnerable. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens 1♦. East passes, and you have to choose a response as South.

You have 11 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit. That's enough for at least game when partner has opened the bidding. First, you need to decide Where, and you start by responding 1♠.

West passes, and partner raises to 2♠. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Partner's raise shows a minimum opening bid and at least three-card support for spades. Having found a fit, you can take the partnership right to game in spades.

Everyone passes, ending the auction. You are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣Q, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A83<br>♥ JT4<br>♦ AQJ54<br>♣ 65</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QT7654<br>♥ KQ32<br>♦ 2<br>♣ AT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has a minimum balanced hand but chose to raise spades with three-card support and a low doubleton club.

In 4♠, the first step is to consider the number of potential losers. Missing four spades including the ♠K, ♠J, and ♠9, there are three potential losers if the defenders' spades divide 4-0. There is a sure heart loser since the opponents hold the ♥A. There will be one club loser remaining after the ♣A is gone. There are no diamond losers. Dummy's ♦A will take care of the singleton diamond in declarer's hand. So there are five potential losers: three spades, one heart, and one club. Since you can afford only three losers, two need to be eliminated.

There will be only one spade loser if the defenders' four spades are divided 2-2. There will also be only one loser if the spades divide 3-1 and either defender has a singleton spade honor. In fact, if West holds a singleton ♠K, you can avoid losing any spade tricks by playing the ♠A and then finessing against East's ♠J. If East holds three or all four spades including the ♠K and ♠J, you will also be able to avoid losing more than one trick by playing the ♠A and then leading toward the ♠Q-10. Assuming the spades divide no worse than 3-1, the only time there will be two spade losers is when West holds three spades including the ♠K and ♠J. Of course, if West holds all four spades, you'll find out when you play the ♠A and will have to lose three spade tricks. You can't afford that, so you must hope the spades are no worse than 3-1.

You can't do anything about the heart loser, but there are a couple of possibilities to eliminate the club loser. Since West has led a club, you won't be able to establish the hearts and discard a club. The defenders will take their club winners on gaining the lead with the ♥A.

However, you may be able to make use of the diamond suit. You can try to establish an extra diamond winner on which to discard the club loser. One possibility is to lead a diamond toward dummy and finesse the ♦J or ♦Q, hoping West holds the ♦K. If the finesse works, you can discard the club loser on the ♦A. That's a 50% chance. Another possibility is to lead a diamond to dummy's ♦A and then lead the ♦Q or ♦J, hoping East holds the ♦K. If East plays the ♦K, you can ruff and then discard the club loser on dummy's remaining high diamond. If East doesn't play the ♦K, you can immediately discard the club loser. This is a ruffing finesse. It's also a 50% chance.

If you decide to try to establish a diamond winner, can you afford to draw trumps first?

No. As soon as you lose a spade trick, the defenders will take their established club winner. Also, if you are going to try the ruffing finesse, you may need the as an entry to dummy's established diamond winner if the finesse works.

Since both of the regular finesse and the ruffing finesse have a 50% chance of success, does it matter which one you choose to take?

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣Q. You play low from dummy, East makes an encouraging attitude signal with the ♣7, and you win the ♣A.

Suppose you decide to take the straightforward diamond finesse. You lead a low diamond and, when West follows with a low diamond, you finesse dummy's ♦J. Unfortunately, this loses to East's ♦K. So much for that 50% chance.

East now takes a trick with the ♣K. East takes another trick with the ♥A. East leads another heart which you win in dummy.

Having lost three tricks already, you can't afford to lose any spade tricks. You play the ♠A but only low spades appear from both opponents.

You are going to have to lose at least one spade trick and the contract is going down.

It would be unfortunate to find out at this point that the defenders' spades were divided 2-2 all along. Then you could have made the contract by simply playing on spades right away. You would lose only one spade, one heart, and one club. On the actual deal, when you play another spade, East shows out. West holds the ♠K-J, trapping your ♠Q-10, and you have to lose two spade tricks.

So you tried the straightforward finesse and went down two tricks. Was there something else you might have done?

## Another Possible Play

Would it have been better to play trumps first?

West leads the ♣Q, and you win the first trick with the ♣A. You play a spade to dummy's ♠A. Both defenders follow with low spades. The good news is that the spades haven't divided 4-0. The bad news is that no spade honor has appeared. You lead a spade from dummy. Unfortunately, East shows out. You have to lose a trick to West's ♠J.

West takes a trick with the ♠K. West leads a club to Easts ♣K. East takes a trick with the ♥A. The defenders have taken four tricks.

You have the rest of the tricks, but 4♠ is down one. So drawing trumps first doesn't work on this deal. It looks as though you have to get rid of the club loser if you are to make the contract.

Let's go back and try one more time.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣Q, and you win the first trick with the ♣A.

This time, suppose you decide to try the ruffing finesse. You lead a low diamond to dummy's ♦A. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. You lead the ♦Q, and East follows with a low diamond. Now what?

Having decided to play East to hold the ♦K, you discard the club loser. When West follows with a low diamond, the ruffing finesse has succeeded and you have eliminated the club loser. It wouldn't have done East any good to cover the ♦Q. You would have ruffed, crossed to dummy's ♠A, and discarded the club on dummy's ♦J.

Now you are in great shape. You play dummy's ♠A and both defenders follow with low spades. The contract becomes guaranteed. At worst, you will lose two spades and a heart. You will even make an overtrick if East has the ♠K or the spades were divided 2-2.

## Why the Ruffing Finesse?

Since both the straightforward diamond finesse and the ruffing finesse have an equal 50% chance of success, weren't you just lucky to decide to take the ruffing finesse?

Let's go back once more and, this time, let's change the East-West diamond holdings and give West the ♦K.

West leads the and you win the ♣A. You lead a diamond to dummy's ♦A. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. You lead the ♦Q from dummy and, when East follows with a low diamond, you discard the ♣10, hoping East holds the ♦K. Oops! This time, it is West who holds the ♦K.

West then leads a club to East's ♣K. But having discarded the club loser, you can ruff this trick. Essentially, you have exchanged a club loser for a diamond loser.

The difference this time is you still have the chance that the spades will behave nicely. You play a spade to dummy's ♠A, and both defenders follow with low spades. You continue with a low spade from dummy. East now shows up with the ♠K as West follows with the ♠J. The spades are favorable.

East takes a trick with the ♥A. That's the third trick but also the last trick for the defense. You have made the contract, losing only a spade, a heart, and a diamond.

## Summary

Here's the actual deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A83<br>♥ JT4<br>♦ AQJ54<br>♣ 65</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ9<br>♥ 875<br>♦ 963<br>♣ QJ98</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 2<br>♥ A96<br>♦ KT87<br>♣ K7432</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QT7654<br>♥ KQ32<br>♦ 2<br>♣ AT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Of course, West might have held both the ♦K and three spades headed by the ♠K-J. In that case, you would go down if you took the ruffing finesse instead of the straightforward finesse. You could have made the contract by taking the straightforward finesse. The point is that by taking the ruffing finesse, you give yourself two chances rather than one. If you take the straightforward finesse and it loses, you go down right away... down two tricks on the actual lie of the cards. If you don't take either finesse but rely on having only one spade loser, you go down if the spades lie unfavorably. If you take the ruffing finesse and it loses, you can still fall back on the chance that the spades will be favorably located.

The ruffing finesse is a good technique to become acquainted with. If it works, you create a winner without losing a trick. If it fails, you still create a winner which might be useful elsewhere... or you might still have a second chance, as on this deal.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/03/06)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/03)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/03)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/06#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.