---
prev:
  text: '2025-03-06'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/06'

next:
  text: '2025-03-08'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/08'
---

# 2025-03-07

On this deal, will there be a problem getting to your established winners?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A96<br>♥ AT32<br>♦ AT764<br>♣ K</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens 3♣. That's a preemptive bid, typically showing a good seven-card suit but less than the values for a one-level opening. East passes, and you must choose a call after this start.

You have 15 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. You could pass, hoping partner can take at least nine tricks with clubs as trumps. However, partner should have a good club suit, especially being vulnerable, and your ♣K should help solidify partner's suit. Combined with your aces in the other three suits, there is a reasonable chance of making 3NT. Since you can visualize seven possible club winners if partner's suit is headed by the ♣A-Q-J, you can bid an aggressive 3NT. Let's go with that. You may need a little luck if partner's clubs aren't that good.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠5, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJ4<br>♥ 85<br>♦ 5<br>♣ QJT9876</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A96<br>♥ AT32<br>♦ AT764<br>♣ K</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Oops. Partner's club suit is not exactly what you were expecting. Partner does have the ♠K-J as some compensation for holding neither of the top two club honors, but you would have had ten top tricks if the ♠K-J were the ♣A instead. Partner does have less than a one-level opening bid - 7 high-card points plus 3 length points for the seven-card club suit. With the auction over, your focus is on taking nine tricks.

You start making a plan by counting the number of sure tricks you have. You have two sure spade winners, the ♠A and ♠K. You have just one sure heart winner, the ♥A. There are no sure club tricks since the opponents hold the ♣A. There is one sure diamond winner, the ♦A. That's a total of only four immediate winners: two spades, a heart, and a diamond. You need to establish five more winners.

In spades, West has led the ♠5. That gives you a good chance of making a third spade trick. If West holds the ♠Q, you can win a trick with dummy's ♠J. Even if West holds only the ♠10, by playing low from dummy, you will force East to play the ♠Q to prevent you from winning a trick with the ♠9.

You are unlikely to get any extra tricks in hearts and diamonds.

In clubs, however, you can promote six winners by driving out the ♣A. So you should be able to develop the tricks you need.

Are there any potential problems?

Yes.

There will be no problem if the defenders take their ♣A when you lead the ♣K. You can then reach dummy's established winners with the ♠K. But what if they don't?

Let's see what might happen.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠5. You are faced with your first decision. What are you playing from dummy?

You definitely don't want to play the ♠K since that is the only sure entry to dummy after the clubs are established. There is also no rush to play the ♠J. If East has the ♠Q and West the ♠10, you can get three spade tricks by playing low.

You play the ♠4 from dummy, and East plays the ♠8. You've reached another critical point in the play. What are you playing to this trick?

It's tempting to win this trick cheaply with the ♠9 since that will give you an extra spade winner and you still have the ♠K left as an entry to dummy. Let's see what will happen if you do.

Suppose you win the first trick with the ♠9. What next?

You want to drive out the ♣A to establish dummy's remaining clubs as winners. You lead the ♣K, but both defenders play low, letting you win this trick. Now what?

You need to get to dummy so you can continue playing clubs. You lead your low spade and West plays the ♠10. You win the trick with dummy's ♠K. There's not much point in playing the ♠J. Even if it wins, that won't give you another entry to dummy because you'll have to win the next spade in your hand with the ♠A.

You lead the ♣Q. This time, East wins the as you discard a low diamond. Dummy's remaining clubs are now established as winners. The good news is you have five club winners in dummy. The bad news is you have no way to reach them.

All you can do is to take the three aces in your hand. That's only six tricks. 3NT is down three.

What could you have done?

Let's go back to the first trick.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠5, you play low from dummy, and East plays the ♠8.

Before you automatically play to the first trick, what clues are available from West's opening lead?

West has presumably led fourth best from West's longest and strongest suit. If that's the case, you can apply the Rule of Eleven. What does that tell you?

East has no spade remaining higher than West's ♠5!

11 - 5 = 6. So there are six spades higher than the ♠5 in the other three hands. Dummy has two, you have three, and East has just shown up with one. That accounts for all six spades higher than the ♠5.

How can you take advantage of this information?

Win the first trick with the ♠A!

You are likely going to need two entries to dummy. Let's see how this helps out.

Next, you lead the ♣K. The defenders make the good defensive play of holding up winning the ♣A, trying to make it difficult for you to establish the suit. The ♣K wins the trick. What now?

You are going to need two entries to dummy: one to get there to drive out the second to reach the winners once they are established. Those entries can only come from spades. You lead a low spade and West plays a low spade. What are you playing from dummy?

A confident ♠J! Your detective work has already told you that East has no high spades remaining.

As you fully expected, dummy's wins the trick as East follows with a low spade. You have your first entry to dummy.

You lead dummy's ♣Q. This time, East takes the ♣A. There's no reason to hold up. You would simply keep leading clubs. You discard a diamond.

East leads a low diamond, and you win the ♦A. You reach dummy for the second time with the ♠K. You can now take the established club winners as well as the ♥A.

You lose the last trick, but that's all. You finish with eleven tricks: three spades, one heart, one diamond, and six clubs. That's much better than down three!

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJ4<br>♥ 85<br>♦ 5<br>♣ QJT9876</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT752<br>♥ Q974<br>♦ KQ<br>♣ 32</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 83<br>♥ KJ6<br>♦ J9832<br>♣ A54</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A96<br>♥ AT32<br>♦ AT764<br>♣ K</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The decision about how to play a single suit should not be made in isolation. You should consider how the play in the suit might impact the whole deal.

On this deal, it was not the total number of spade tricks that mattered, but which hand would you win them in and when. It would have been ineffective to win the first trick with dummy's ♠J as the first entry to dummy would come at the wrong time. Similarly, it would be ineffective to win the first trick with the ♠9 since you can anticipate that you will need two entries to dummy after playing the ♣K. It is the clues that come from West's opening lead that guide you to find the winning play.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/03/07)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/06)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/03)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/08)

### By Date

Use the links below.