---
prev:
  text: '2025-03-09'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/09'

next:
  text: '2025-03-11'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/11'
---

# 2025-03-10

In today's column, can you find a way to make a very ambitious contract?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ8<br>♥ AK5<br>♦ AQT4<br>♣ A64</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. North and South are vulnerable, and East and West are not. As dealer there is a chance to choose an opening call.

There are 22 high-card points. Although the hand is balanced, it is too strong to open 2NT which would show only 20-21 points. Instead, you start with a strong artificial 2♣ opening.

West passes. North responds 2♦, which the partnership has agreed to play as an artificial waiting bid. East passes. It's time to choose a rebid.

You can now describe the hand with a rebid of 2NT. This shows a balanced hand of 22-24 points.

West passes. North raises all the way to 7NT, and East passes. The auction is back to you once more.

You have described the hand and partner has decided How High and Where the partnership belongs. Partner has enough to go for a grand slam in notrump. You have nothing left to do but pass.

West also passes, ending the auction. You are now the declarer in 7NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>7NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥10.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJT<br>♥ QJ7<br>♦ J73<br>♣ KQ75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQ8<br>♥ AK5<br>♦ AQT4<br>♣ A64</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner, with 14 high-card points, knows the partnership has 36-38 combined points, likely enough for a grand slam.

Making 7NT requires all thirteen tricks.

Playing in notrump, begin by counting the sure tricks. There are only three sure spade tricks even though you hold the top five honors between the combined hands. Similarly, there are only three sure heart tricks even though you hold the top four honors in the combined hands. There are three sure club tricks, your ♣A and dummy's ♣K and ♣Q. There is one sure diamond winner, the ♦A. That's a total of only ten winners: three spades, three hearts, three clubs, and one diamond. Three more tricks are needed to make the contract.

The club suit might provide an extra winner if the six missing clubs divide exactly 3-3. That's against the odds, only a 36% chance.

The diamond suit might provide the extra tricks needed with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♦K. That's a 50% chance.

So, even if the missing clubs divide favorably, it looks as though everything hinges on the diamond finesse.

Is that the only consideration?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥10. Suppose you win the first trick with dummy's ♥J as East follows with a low heart.

Since you are going to need the diamond finesse sooner or later, suppose you lead the ♦J from dummy. Good news! East cover with the ♦K and you win the ♦A. The diamond finesse has worked.

You can take the three spade winners. You can take the remaining two heart winners. You can take the three club winners, ending in the dummy. Both defenders follow to the first two rounds but West shows out on the third round, discarding a heart. The clubs have divided 4-2, as might be expected, and East still has a club winner remaining.

Time to take the established diamond winners. Both defenders follow to the ♦Q. Unfortunately, when you play the ♦10, West follows but East shows out. The defenders diamonds have divided 4-2.

West still has a diamond left and wins the last trick. The grand slam has gone down. The diamond finesse worked, but both the missing clubs and missing diamonds divided 4-2.

Was there anything more that could be done?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥10 and you choose to win the first trick with dummy's ♥J. East follows with a low heart.

You need the diamond finesse to work, but that's not all. You either need all four tricks from the diamond suit or you will need an extra trick from the club suit.

To get four tricks from the diamond suit, you can't afford to lead the ♦J from dummy!

If East covers with the ♦K, you will still have a diamond loser if the defenders' diamonds don't divide 3-3. So you start the diamonds by leading a low diamond from dummy. This guards against East holding a singleton ♦K. East follows with a low diamond. No singleton ♦K. You finesse the ♦10. Good news! East holds the ♦K, so the diamond finesse is working. You need to repeat the finesse. You can cross to dummy with one of the club winners. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. You are again careful to lead a low diamond from dummy. This guards against East having started with a doubleton ♦K. Great news! The ♦K appears from East. East apparently started with a doubleton ♦K. You win the ♦A.

The contract is now assured. You can play a low diamond to dummy's established ♦J. You can cross back to your hand with the ♣A. You can take a trick with the ♦A. That's the fourth diamond winner. You can discard dummy's low club since you no longer need it. You have another club winner to take. There are two heart winners to take.

You finish off by taking the three spade winners. You've made the grand slam contract, taking three spade tricks, three heart tricks, three club tricks, and four diamond tricks. You needed some luck in the diamond suit, but that was all.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AJT<br>♥ QJ7<br>♦ J73<br>♣ KQ75</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 643<br>♥ T984<br>♦ 9865<br>♣ 93</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 9752<br>♥ 632<br>♦ K2<br>♣ JT82</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KQ8<br>♥ AK5<br>♦ AQT4<br>♣ A64</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You need the diamond finesse to work, but that's not all. In addition, you need a fourth trick from the diamond suit or a fourth trick from the club suit. To give yourself every chance, you have to handle the diamonds carefully. By leading low diamonds from dummy each time, you guard against East having started with a singleton ♦K or a doubleton ♦K - as in the actual deal. If the ♦K doesn't appear on the first two rounds, you can then play the ♦A, hoping East started with only three diamonds. If East started with four or more diamonds, then you will have to fall back on hoping to get an extra trick from the club suit. So you will make the contract if East started with a singleton, doubleton, or tripleton ♦K or the clubs divide 3-3. You need a little luck to make the contract.

It is only a 50% chance East holds the ♦K. You just want to make sure you don't need much more than that.

Did partner bid too much?

Holding 14 high-card points, partner knew there would be at least 37 combined points if you held either 23 or 24 points. Unfortunately, you held only 22 points. Perhaps partner should only have invited a grand slam by raising to 5NT, but then there wouldn't be as much fun to the play.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/03/10)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/08)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/03)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/10#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.