---
prev:
  text: '2025-03-10'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/10'

next:
  text: '2025-03-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/12'
---

# 2025-03-11

In today's deal, when is it right to cover an honor?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K93<br>♥ 532<br>♦ K43<br>♣ K943</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. West is the dealer and opens 1NT, showing a balanced hand with about 15-17 points. Your partner, North, passes, and East raises to 3NT. You have to decide what call to make.

With a balanced hand and only 9 high-card points, you have nothing to say.

West and partner also pass, ending the auction. Partner is now on lead against West's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♥10, and East puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q87<br>♥ KQ7<br>♦ QJ95<br>♣ T86</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K93<br>♥ 532<br>♦ K43<br>♣ K943</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The ♥Q is played from dummy. You have your first decision to make. What are you playing to this trick?

With no help in hearts, you give a discouraging attitude signal by playing the ♥2. Declarer follows with the ♥6. Dummy's ♥Q has won the first trick.

Declarer now leads the ♦Q from dummy. You have another decision to make. What are you playing to this trick?

One common guideline is "cover an honor with an honor." By playing your honor on dummy's honor, declarer will have to play a second honor to win the trick. You have forced declarer to use two honors to capture one of yours. Let's see if that's a good idea on this deal.

Suppose you cover dummy's ♦Q with the ♦K. Declarer wins with the ♦A. You have indeed made declarer use both the ♦Q and ♦A to capture your ♦K. Hopefully that may promote some of partner's diamonds into winners. Declarer continues with the ♦8. Partner plays the ♦10, and dummy's ♦J wins the trick.

Next, declarer leads the ♠Q from dummy. Following the guideline, you cover an honor with an honor and play the ♠K. Declarer wins the ♠A. Again, you've made declarer use two honors to capture one of yours

Declarer takes a trick with the ♠J. Declarer leads a diamond to dummy's ♦9 as both you and partner follow suit. The diamonds have divided 3-3 and dummy's last diamond is a winner. Declarer takes the ♦5 as you and partner discard low hearts and declarer a low club. Declarer leads a low heart from dummy and wins the ♥A. Declarer next takes a trick with dummy's ♥K.

Declarer has taken the first nine tricks, making the 3NT contract. So it doesn't look as though covering an honor with an honor did much good on this deal. Perhaps you shouldn't be playing your kings so quickly.

Let's go back to see what will happen if you don't cover dummy's honors.

## Another Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♥10, and East puts down the dummy. Declarer leads the ♦Q from dummy.

You've seen that covering an honor with an honor doesn't seem to defeat the contract. Let's see what will happen if you don't cover any of dummy's honors.

You play low, declarer plays low, and partner follows with a low diamond. Dummy's ♦Q wins the trick. Declarer continues with the ♦J. Keeping consistent, let's suppose you refuse to cover this honor also. The ♦J wins the trick as declarer and partner again follow with low diamonds. Declarer plays another diamond, winning the ♦A as your ♦K and partner's ♦10 fall on the same trick.

Declarer crosses back to dummy by playing the ♥J and overtaking with dummy's ♥K. Declarer takes a trick with dummy's last diamond. You discard a heart, declarer discards a club, and partner discards a low spade.

Declarer now leads dummy's ♠Q. Being consistent with refusing to cover an honor with an honor, suppose you play low again. The ♠Q wins the trick as declarer and partner follow with low spades. Another spade is led from dummy and, when you follow with a low spade, declarer plays the ♠J, winning the trick as partner follows with the ♠10. Declarer's ♠A wins the next trick as your ♠K falls beneath it. Declarer has another spade to take.

And declarer still has a heart trick. That's eleven straight tricks for declarer. That was worse. Refusing to cover any honors lets declarer make two overtricks. So there is something to be said about covering honors. At least that holds declarer to nine tricks.

But could you do even better?

Let's go through the play one more time.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♥10, and declarer wins with dummy's ♥Q as you play a low heart. Declarer leads the ♦Q from dummy. You are at a critical point in the play.

Although the general guideline here is to cover an honor with an honor, there is a caveat: "Cover the last of touching honors." Let's see if that makes a difference.

Since the ♦Q is the first of the touching diamond honors in dummy, you don't cover with the ♦K. Instead, you play low and dummy's ♦Q wins the trick. Declarer continues with the ♦J. You have another critical decision. What are you playing to this trick?

Since this is the last of the touching honors, the guideline says to cover an honor with an honor. You play the ♦K, and declarer wins the trick with the ♦A.

Declarer leads another diamond, but this time partner wins the trick with the ♦10. By covering the second diamond honor from dummy, you promoted partner's ♦10 into a winner.

Partner leads another heart and declarer wins with the ♥A. Declarer crosses to dummy's ♥K. Declarer takes a trick with dummy's established diamond winner. You discard an encouraging club while partner discards a discouraging spade. Declarer now leads the ♠Q from dummy. You have yet another critical decision to make. What are you playing to this trick?

Since there aren't any touching spade honors in dummy, the familiar guideline applies. You cover the with the ♠K. Declarer wins the ♠A as partner follows with another low spade.

Declarer takes a trick with the ♠J. Partner's ♠10 falls on this trick. Your ♠9, however, has now been promoted into a winner.

Declarer leads another spade, and you win this trick with the ♠9. Covering the promoted a winner for your side. You lead a club, and partner wins the ♣Q. Partner takes an established heart winner.

Partner's ♣A wins the last trick. That's the fifth trick for the defense, defeating the 3NT contract.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T42<br>♥ T984<br>♦ T72<br>♣ AQ2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ65<br>♥ AJ6<br>♦ A86<br>♣ J75</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q87<br>♥ KQ7<br>♦ QJ95<br>♣ T86</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K93<br>♥ 532<br>♦ K43<br>♣ K943</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Covering honors can be a complex subject.

On this deal, you can see that the guideline to cover an honor with an honor is important in the spade suit. If you don't cover dummy's with the ♠K, declarer repeats the finesse and takes four spade tricks. Covering with the ♠K allows your side to win the third round of spades.

Covering the second diamond honor but not the first is also critical. If you cover the first honor, declarer can then trap your partner's +10 and take four diamond tricks. If you don't cover either diamond honor, declarer also gets four diamond tricks. Only by covering the last of dummy's diamond honors can you restrict declarer to three tricks.

Promoting tricks for your side is the general objective of covering honors on defense. If there's nothing to promote, it may not matter what you do. But if there is something to promote, you must be careful to cover the "right" honor.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/03/11)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/04)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/03)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/18)

### By Date

Use the links below.