---
prev:
  text: '2025-03-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/12'

next:
  text: '2025-03-14'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/14'
---

# 2025-03-13

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT65<br>♥ AKQJ<br>♦ J9<br>♣ Q74</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

You have a balanced hand with 16 high-card points. That's ideal for a 1NT opening when the partnership range is 15-17 points.

West passes, and partner, North, responds 2♦. The partnership agreement is that this is a Jacoby transfer bid, showing five or more hearts and asking you to bid hearts. East passes, and you have to choose a rebid.

Partner has asked you to bid 2♥ and you should do that. Some partnerships allow South to super-accept with four-card support for partner's major suit and jump to 3♥. Other than the hearts, however, your hand isn't that great. So let's assume you simply bid 2♥.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 2♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣10, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q94<br>♥ T9632<br>♦ K4<br>♣ J53</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT65<br>♥ AKQJ<br>♦ J9<br>♣ Q74</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You have to find eight tricks to make the contract. It looks to be a good thing that you didn't jump to 3♥. You are certainly high enough.

To make a plan in 2♥, you start by counting the potential losers. You don't have any losers in the trump suit. There are two potential spade losers since you are missing the ♠A and ♠J. There are two potential diamond losers. Although you have the ♦K and ♦J, the opponents have the ♦A and ♦Q. You start with three potential club losers. However, West has led a club. By playing low from dummy, you are guaranteed a club trick, unless an opponent started with a doubleton club and can get a ruff. Assuming the defenders can't get a club ruff, you start with six potential losers: two spades, two diamonds, and two clubs. Four of them are sure losers: the ♣A, ♦A, and ♣A-K. Since you can afford only five losers, you need to eliminate either the second spade loser or the second diamond loser.

In spades, you have a two-way finesse for the missing ♠J. If you think West holds the ♠J you can play a spade toward dummy, planning to play the ♠9. If you think East holds the ♠J, you can play a spade toward your hand, planning to finesse the ♠10. That's a 50-50 guess.

In general, this diamond holding is one that is better led by the opponents than your side. If East leads a diamond, you are guaranteed a trick with the ♦K. If West leads a diamond, you can guess whether to play low from dummy - the winning play if West has the ♦Q - or the ♦K - the winning play if West has the ♦A.

There is one additional possibility. After the and are gone, you might have an extra spade winner with the fourth spade in your hand. You could then use it to discard one of dummy's diamonds, leaving you with only one diamond loser since you could ruff your second diamond in dummy.

So you have chances to avoid a loser in both spades and diamonds. If the defenders get a club ruff, you will need to avoid a loser in both suits.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣10. You play low from dummy, and East wins the trick with the ♣K. East continues with the ♣A, winning the second trick as West follows with the ♣9. East leads a third round of clubs, and you are relieved to see West follow with the ♣8. No club ruff for the defenders.

You might as well draw the defenders' trumps. Both defenders follow suit when you play the ♥A. When you play a second round of trumps, West shows out, discarding a diamond. The trumps have divided 3-1 and East still has a trump remaining. You draw East's last trump with the ♥Q as West discards another diamond. You are now at the critical point in the play. Which suit should you play first? Spades or diamonds?

It may seem best to start with the spades. You might establish your fourth spade as a winner on which you may be able to discard a diamond from dummy. Let's see what might happen if you do.

Suppose you choose to start by leading a low spade to dummy's ♠Q. You win the trick as both defenders follow with low spades. West presumably holds the ♠A. You lead a low spade from dummy and, when East follows with a low spade, you finesse the ♠10. Unfortunately, this loses to West's ♠J. So much for guessing that suit.

West now takes a trick with the ♠A. You haven't managed to avoid a spade loser. However, you now have a spade winner in your hand on which you might be able to discard one of dummy's diamonds. Before you can do that, however, West shifts to a low diamond. Now you are going to have to guess whether to play dummy's ♦K, hoping West has the ♦A, or the ♦4, hoping West has the ♦Q. Let's suppose you decide to play a low diamond from dummy. Sadly, East wins the ♦Q. Did you misguess?

No. East takes the ♦A. You couldn't guess right. East had both diamond honors.

You have the last two tricks, but the 2♥ contract is down one. At least it's good you didn't get to the three level. Perhaps you could have made a better guess of the location of the ♠J.

Or could you have avoided one of the guesses?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♣10. A low club is played from dummy and East wins the ♣K. East takes a second trick with the ♣A. When East continues with a third round of clubs, you win with the ♣Q as West follows suit. You draw trumps in three rounds, starting with the ♥A, ♥K, and the ♥Q, and find out that the trumps have divided 3-1. West has only one heart and shows out in the second round. What now?

You have to decide whether to start with trying to guess the location of the ♠J or start by leading toward dummy's ♦K.

While leading a spade gives you a chance of guessing which defender holds the starting with the diamonds gives you a sure thing!

Let's see why. Suppose you lead a low diamond and take the 50% finesse by playing dummy's ♦K. Too bad. That loses to East's ♦A. So much for avoiding a diamond loser.

East takes a second diamond trick with the ♦Q. You've lost both diamond tricks, but now look at the position. East is on lead, and what can East do?

If East leads a club or a diamond, you can ruff with the ♥J in your hand and sluff a spade from dummy. You'll be left with only one spade loser. So suppose East leads a spade. You can play low from your hand. Whatever West plays, you will have only one spade loser. West chooses to win the ♠A, and now both dummy's ♠Q and your ♠K are winners.

You have the rest of the tricks. You've made the 2♥ contract. You lost only two clubs, two diamonds, and one spade.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q94<br>♥ T9632<br>♦ K4<br>♣ J53</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ2<br>♥ 8<br>♦ T87632<br>♣ T98</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 873<br>♥ 754<br>♦ AQ5<br>♣ AK62</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT65<br>♥ AKQJ<br>♦ J9<br>♣ Q74</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

It's usually best to avoid playing a short equal-length suit when possible - the diamond suit in this case - and go after your longer suits - such the spade suit on this deal. Here, however, you are using the short suit as a throw-in suit to avoid having to guess a longer, unequally-divided suit. The spades are a suit that is best led by the opponents. You then always lose only one trick. If the opponents give you a ruff and a sluff instead of leading a spade, you should be careful to discard a spade from dummy, the shorter spade hand.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/03/13)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/10)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/03)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/14)

### By Date

Use the links below.