---
prev:
  text: '2025-03-13'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/13'

next: false
---

# 2025-03-14

On this deal, do you have enough information to find the winning play?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKJT2<br>♥ 75<br>♦ A753<br>♣ Q7</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make with this hand.

There are 14 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. Although the total of 15 falls in the range for a 1NT opening, the hand is only semi-balanced and there isn't any potential rebid problem. You open at the one level in the five-card major.

West overcalls 2♣. Your partner, North, bids 3♣. Partner's cuebid of the opponent's suit shows spade support and at least invitational strength - a limit raise or better. East passes, and it's back to you.

After West's club overcall, the can be downgraded since it is likely a wasted value. Despite that, the hand has decent 5-4 distribution with two doubletons. With the ♠A-K and ♦A in the long suits, this hand is probably worth accepting partner's invitation. Let's go with jumping to 4♠ although some might settle for 3♠.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣A, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q953<br>♥ AQ4<br>♦ KJ94<br>♣ J6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJT2<br>♥ 75<br>♦ A753<br>♣ Q7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Dummy has 13 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton club. Although the ♣J is of doubtful value, partner would have continued to 4♠ even if you rebid only 3♠.

You start your plan by considering the potential losers. There are no spade losers. The trump suit is solid. There are two heart losers in your hand, but dummy's ♥A will take care of one of them. That leaves you with one potential heart loser. There are two club losers. It looks as though you are about to lose those right away since West has led the ♣A. Although you have the ♦A, ♦K, and ♦J, there are two potential losers since you are missing the ♦Q and ♦10. That's a total of five potential losers: a heart, two clubs, and two diamonds. You can afford only three.

You may be able to avoid the heart loser with the help of a finesse. You plan to lead a low heart toward dummy and play the ♥Q, hoping West has the ♥K. That's basically a 50% chance, but the odds are a little better since West overcalled at the two level while East passed throughout.

In diamonds, you will have only one loser if the five missing diamonds in the defenders' hands are divided 3-2 or if the ♦Q or ♦10 falls singleton. If West holds the ♦Q, you can also avoid a loser by taking a finesse of dummy's ♦J.

With eight diamonds in the combined hands missing the ♦Q, you would usually follow the guideline eight ever, nine never. You would play the ♦A and then lead a low diamond toward dummy, planning to finesse the ♦J if West follows with a second low diamond.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣A, and this wins the first trick as you follow with low clubs from each hand and East plays the ♣2. West continues with the ♣K. You and dummy follow with your remaining clubs, as East plays the ♣3.

West now switches to the ♥9. That doesn't look good. It's more likely that West is leading the top of nothing rather than away from the ♥K. Still, your only chance to avoid a heart loser is to try the finesse. You try the ♥Q but, as you feared, East wins with the ♥K. You've now lost the first three tricks. You won't be able to afford a diamond loser. East returns the ♥J. You follow with your remaining heart, West plays the ♥2, and you win with dummy's ♥A.

Since you have no need to ruff anything in dummy, you can go ahead and draw trumps. You lead a low spade from dummy. East plays the ♠4, and you win the ♠A as West contributes the ♠8. You continue with the ♠K. On this trick, West discards the ♣4. The defenders' spades have divided 3-1. East still has a spade left. You lead a low spade to dummy's ♠Q, extracting East's last trump as West discards another club.

With the defenders' trumps all gone, it is time to tackle the diamonds. Holding eight diamonds in the combined hands, unless you have additional information about the defenders' hands, you would normally play the ♦A, planning to finesse dummy's ♦J if West follows with a low diamond on the second round of the suit. If West started with a doubleton or tripleton ♦Q, you would take all four diamond tricks. So let's see how this will work on the actual deal.

You cross to your ♦A. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. Next, you play a low diamond and East also plays low. You follow with your plan and play the ♦J. East discards a heart, however. Your ♦J wins the trick, but West still has the ♦Q-10, trapping dummy's ♦K-9.

No matter what you do next, you will have to concede a diamond trick to West eventually. You have lost two clubs, one heart, and one diamond. 4♠ is down one.

What could you have done differently?

Let's look again.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣A, winning the first trick as East plays the ♣2. West continues with the ♣K. East follows suit again with the ♣3. That's two tricks for the defense. West switches to the ♥9. You try the finesse but it loses to East's ♥K. That's three tricks for the defense. East returns the ♥J, and you win the trick with dummy's ♥A. You draw the defenders' trumps, finding that they break 3-1 as West shows out on the second round of spades.

You're now at a point in which you have to tackle the diamond suit. What clues do you have about the defenders' holdings?

West overcalled 2♣ during the auction and must have at least a five-card suit. East played low-high when West led the ♣A-K. East would likely have played high-low with an even number of clubs to give West a count. So it looks as though East started with three clubs and West with a six-card suit.

In spades, West showed up with one spade and East with three.

In hearts, both West and East have shown up with two hearts so far. Is there any way to get more information about the heart layout?

Yes!

There's no harm in ruffing dummy's last heart to see what happens. Suppose you lead dummy's last heart. East plays the ♥10 and you ruff. On this trick, West shows out, discarding yet another club. What information does that impart?

West started with only two hearts and East must have started with six hearts.

What does that tell you about West's distribution?

West started with four diamonds!

West started with only one spade and two hearts. If West started with six clubs, West's last four cards must all be diamonds.

Does this match what you know about East's distribution?

Yes!

You've found out that East started with three spades and six hearts. From East's low-high signal in clubs, it looks as though East started with three clubs. That leaves room for only one diamond!

With this information, you now "know" how to play the diamonds. You play the ♦A, and both defenders follow with low diamonds. You expected that. You lead a low diamond, and West follows with another low diamond. What are you playing from dummy?

The ♦9!

You "know" East has no diamonds remaining. As you surmised from your detective work, East shows out, discarding a heart. The defenders' diamonds did indeed divide 4-1.

You need to get back to your hand, and you can do that with a spade. You lead a diamond and, when West plays the ♦10, you play the ♦J, taking the "proven" finesse.

The ♦K wins the last trick, and you've made the 4♠ contract. You lost two clubs and a heart, but no diamond tricks.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q953<br>♥ AQ4<br>♦ KJ94<br>♣ J6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 8<br>♥ 92<br>♦ QT82<br>♣ AKT954</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 764<br>♥ KJT863<br>♦ 6<br>♣ 832</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKJT2<br>♥ 75<br>♦ A753<br>♣ Q7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If you played the diamonds in the "normal" fashion, taking the ♦A and then leading a low diamond to dummy's ♦J, the finesse would have worked, but the contract would go down when East showed out. You could no longer avoid losing a diamond trick to West's remaining ♦Q-10. To make the contract, you need to play the diamonds in an unusual fashion, taking a "deep" finesse of the 29. To do that, you need an exact picture of the defenders' distribution. The clues that help you do that are West's revealing overcall and a little research in the heart suit.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/03/14)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/13)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/03)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/14#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.