---
prev:
  text: '2025-03-16'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/16'

next:
  text: '2025-03-18'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/18'
---

# 2025-03-17

In this deal, what is the best order of play?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ6<br>♥ AJT5<br>♦ J93<br>♣ A94</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South with both sides vulnerable. As the dealer, you have the first opportunity to open the bidding.

There are 16 high-card points. The hand is balanced and falls in the middle of the 15-17 range for an opening bid of 1NT. You open 1NT.

West passes. North raises to 3NT, and East passes. The auction is back to you.

Partner's raise to game is a signoff bid. You are expected to pass. West passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠7. Dummy comes down with a balanced hand and 11 high-card points.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 85<br>♥ Q94<br>♦ AQT7<br>♣ K862</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ6<br>♥ AJT5<br>♦ J93<br>♣ A94</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You need nine tricks in 3NT.

In a notrump contract, begin making a plan by counting the sure winners you have. You start with one sure spade winner but West has led the ♠7. Whatever East plays to the first trick, you are assured of a second spade trick. There is one sure heart winner, your ♥A. There are two sure club winners, your ♣A and dummy's ♣K. There is one sure diamond winner, dummy's ♦A. That's a total of six sure winners: two spades, one heart, two clubs, and one diamond. Three more winners are needed to make the 3NT contract.

If East holds the ♥K, you can establish three additional heart tricks with the help of a repeated finesse. That's a 50% chance. Even if the finesse loses, two additional winners will be created.

You can get an extra winner in clubs through length by giving up a club trick if the six missing clubs divide 3-3. That's against the odds, only about a 36% chance.

If West holds the ♦K, you can get three additional tricks with the help of a repeated finesse. That's a 50% chance. Even if the finesse loses, two additional tricks will be promoted.

So there should be no problem establishing the extra winners you need. The odds of one of the two 50% finesses succeeding is 75%.

Are there any other considerations?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠7. You play a low spade from dummy and East plays the ♠10. You win the ♠Q. That's one of the spade tricks you were expecting, and you still have the ♠A.

You are in the right place to try the diamond finesse. You lead the ♦9 and, when West follows with a low diamond, you play a low diamond from dummy. Unfortunately, this loses to East's ♦K. However, you have established two of the additional tricks you need to make the contract.

East returns the ♠4. You can hold up winning this trick. West wins the ♠9. West leads another spade. You discard a club from dummy. East follows with a low spade and you win the ♠A.

You can take the established diamond winners. On the last diamond, you discard a low club from your hand. Time to try the heart finesse. You lead the ♥9 from dummy and, when East follows with a low heart, you play a low heart from your hand. Unfortunately, your second finesse also loses. However, you've established the extra winners you need and will be okay if West doesn't have too many spade winners to take.

Bad news. East shows out when West takes a spade winner. West started with a five-card spade suit. West has another spade to take and you have to discard established winners.

West runs out of spades and you have the last three tricks. However, the contract has gone down one. Both your finesses lost - only a 25% chance - and West started with a five-card spade suit.

Was there anything which could have been done to overcome the bad luck?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠7. When a low spade is played from dummy, East plays the ♠10. You win the trick with the ♠Q.

If either the heart finesse or the diamond finesse works, you will have enough tricks to make the contract. Your focus, therefore, should be on what if both finesses lose?

West is presumably the dangerous opponent. If West started with five or more spades, you don't want West to gain the lead after the spades are established.

So you should start off with the heart finesse... right into the dangerous opponent!

You want to drive out the dangerous opponent's entry while you still have a spade stopper. You can then hold up to make East a safe opponent and take the diamond finesse, not caring if it loses. Let's see how the play should go.

You can cross to dummy with a club. Now you try the heart finesse. You lead the ♥9 and, when East follows with a low heart, you play low from your hand. If the finesse works, you can lead the ♥J to repeat it. Unfortunately, the finesse loses to West's ♥K.

West continues with the ♣9. You hold up, hoping to turn East into a safe opponent. West leads another spade, driving out your ♠A as East follows with a low spade and you discard a club from dummy.

Now you can try the diamond finesse. You lead the ♦9 and, when West follows with a low diamond, you play low from dummy. If the finesse works, you can lead the ♦J to repeat it. Unfortunately, the finesse loses to East's ♦K.

As you hoped, East has no spade left to lead. If East did have a spade, the defenders' spades would presumably have been divided 4-4. East leads a club, and you win the ♣A. You don't want to give West a chance to gain the lead.

You can take the established diamond winners. You can also take the heart winners.

You have made the contract with an overtrick, even though both finesses lost.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 85<br>♥ Q94<br>♦ AQT7<br>♣ K862</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ973<br>♥ K73<br>♦ 62<br>♣ QT5</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T42<br>♥ 862<br>♦ K854<br>♣ J73</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ6<br>♥ AJT5<br>♦ J93<br>♣ A94</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, the danger is if both finesses lose and the defenders can establish and take enough tricks to defeat the contract. There will be no problem if either finesse works or if West started with only four spades. However, you want to guard against West having a five-card spade suit.

With a choice between taking a finesse into the dangerous opponent and taking a finesse into the safe opponent, you want to lose to the dangerous opponent first, while you still have a stopper. Once the stopper is gone, you want to lose to the safe opponent if you have to lose another trick.

On this deal, West might switch to a club after you hold up in spades. You'll then have to hope either the clubs divide favorably or the diamond finesse works.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/03/17)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/15)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/03)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/17#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.