---
prev:
  text: '2025-03-17'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2025/03/17'

next: false
---

# 2025-03-18

In today's deal, can you take advantage of partner's shortness in a suit?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A6<br>♥ KT6<br>♦ A8642<br>♣ 964</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 1♦.

You have 11 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. East has opened your long suit, and your hand is unsuitable for either an overcall or a takeout double. You pass.

West responds 1♠. Partner passes, and East raises to 2♠.

Still no reason to enter the auction. You pass again.

West now jumps to 4♠. Partner passes, and so does East. The auction is back to you for a third time.

Naturally, you pass.

The auction is over, and partner will be making the opening lead against West's 4♠ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♦10. East puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QT74<br>♥ 984<br>♦ KQJ9<br>♣ KQ</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A6<br>♥ KT6<br>♦ A8642<br>♣ 964</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The ♦J is played from dummy. You have your first decision. What are you playing to this trick?

Partner's ♦10 is almost certainly a singleton. The ♦9 is in dummy and partner is unlikely to lead from a doubleton diamond after East opened 1♦. Partner is hoping to get one or more ruffs, so you want to win this trick. Declarer follows with a low diamond.

You now have a second decision. What are you playing to trick two?

You are obviously going to return a diamond for partner to ruff. Which diamond?

The ♦8.

You expect partner to ruff this trick. Partner will then want to get back to your hand for a second ruff. You don't have a sure entry other than the ♠A, but you do have something in hearts and nothing in diamonds. Returning your highest remaining diamond is a suit preference suit, showing a preference for hearts rather than clubs.

Declarer follows with another low diamond, and partner ruffs with the ♠2. Following your suit preference signal, partner leads the ♥3. A low heart is played from dummy, you play the ♥K, and declarer wins the ♥A. Partner was probably hoping you held the ♥A rather than declarer.

Declarer leads a spade. Partner follows with the ♠8, and the ♠Q is played from dummy. You naturally win the ♠A. There's no reason to hold up. Now what?

You are at the critical point in the defense. Declarer still has a diamond left. Should you return another diamond for partner to ruff? Or should you return a heart, hoping partner holds the ♥Q rather than declarer?

Tough decision. It seems like the easiest thing is to give partner another ruff. Then, if partner holds the ♥Q, partner can take it to defeat the contract two tricks. So let's see what will happen if you lead a diamond.

Suppose you lead another diamond. Declarer follows with a low diamond, and partner discards a heart! Oops. Partner does not have any spades left. Dummy's ♦Q wins the trick.

Declarer draws your remaining trump as partner discards a low club. Declarer crosses to dummy with the ♣Q. On the ♦K, declarer discards the ♥J.

Declarer claims the rest of the tricks. Declarer lost a spade, a diamond, and a diamond ruff. Too bad partner didn't have another spade.

Was there any way to know that?

Let's go back through the play.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♦10, and you win the first trick with the ♦A. You return the ♦8, signaling for partner to lead a heart next, and partner ruffs with the ♠2. Partner leads back the ♥3, and your ♥K drives out declarer's ♥A. Declarer leads a low spade, partner follows with the ♠8, the ♠Q is played from dummy, and you win the ♠A.

You must now decide whether to lead a diamond or a heart. A diamond will be right if partner has another spade remaining. Otherwise, you must return a heart, hoping partner holds the ♥Q.

Partner has told you! Partner ruffed the first trick with the ♠2 and played the ♠8 to this trick. In a ruffing situation, partner's low spade followed by a higher spade shows an even number of spades, obviously two in this case. With an odd number of spades, partner would first play a high spade and then a low spade. This is the exact opposite to the "normal" count signal where a high card followed by a low card shows an even number and a low card followed by a higher card
shows an odd number. The technical name for this signal is a trump echo. High-low in the trump suit shows a third trump in a ruffing situation. So partner's low-high in spades says partner has no trumps remaining.

What if the partnership is unfamiliar with the trump echo?

There are a couple of other indications that partner may be out of trumps. West's jump to 4♠ when East might have held only three spades tends to show a five-card or longer spade suit. With only four spades, West might have made another bid to find out if partner had four-card support. In addition, partner returned a low heart rather than a high heart after getting the first ruff. The lead of a low card in this situation shows some interest in having the suit returned. Partner will usually have an honor when leading low in the middle of the game. With no interest in having a heart returned, partner would usually lead a high heart, top of nothing.

Backing your judgment, you return a heart rather than a diamond. Declarer plays the ♥J and partner wins the ♥Q. That's the fourth trick for the defense.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but you have defeated the 4♠ contract. Your side got a spade trick, a diamond trick, a diamond ruff, and one heart trick.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 82<br>♥ Q7532<br>♦ T<br>♣ T8532</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ953<br>♥ AJ<br>♦ 753<br>♣ AJ7</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QT74<br>♥ 984<br>♦ KQJ9<br>♣ KQ</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A6<br>♥ KT6<br>♦ A8642<br>♣ 964</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Using the trump echo to show an odd number of trumps in a ruffing situation is an idea that has been around for a long time. However, it must be used with caution. Sometimes, you cannot afford to play one of your high trumps to echo. Also, you don't want to help declarer rather than partner. The trump echo is only used when a defender is looking for one or more ruffs. In other situations, the popular modern style is to use the order of play in declarer's trump suit as a suit preference signal. However, on this deal, knowing how many trumps partner holds is quite valuable.

Let's suppose we change the North-South hands slightly:

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 832<br>♥ J7532<br>♦ T<br>♣ T853</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ95<br>♥ AQ<br>♦ 753<br>♣ AJ72</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ QT74<br>♥ 984<br>♦ KQJ9<br>♣ KQ</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A6<br>♥ KT6<br>♦ A8642<br>♣ 964</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Here, declarer has the ♥Q and partner has a third trump. In this case, partner would ruff the second round of diamonds with the ♠8, or ♠3. When partner then plays the ♠2 when declarer leads a spade, you'd know partner has a spade remaining. Leading another diamond is the only way to defeat the contract.

The trump echo doesn't come up that often. When it does, however, it can be a very useful agreement for the partnership to have.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2025/03/18)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/11)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2025/03)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2025/03/18#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.