---
prev:
  text: '2024-08-31'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/08/31'

next:
  text: '2024-09-02'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/02'
---

# 2024-09-01

Today's column takes a closer look at the Jacoby 2NT convention.

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

### The Jacoby 2NT Convention

Jacoby 2NT is a common convention used by responder after partner opens the bidding 1♥ or 1♠ and the next player passes. A Jacoby 2NT response shows at least four-card support for opener's major and enough strength to force to game - about 12 or 13 points or more.

Consider this hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K8<br>♥ AQ62<br>♦ J85<br>♣ A832</td>
	</tr>
</table>

North opens 1♥, and East passes.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has a model hand for the Jacoby 2NT response: four-card heart support and 15 points, counting 1 dummy point for the doubleton spade. The artificial 2NT response allows South to describe the heart support and game-forcing values at once, leaving North-South plenty of room to explore the possibility of slam.

Here is a different hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ7<br>♥ 62<br>♦ KQT53<br>♣ K82</td>
	</tr>
</table>

West deals and passes. North opens 1♠, and East passes.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has spade support and enough strength for game, with 13
high-card points, plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton heart. However, this hand is unsuitable for the Jacoby 2NT convention, because it has only three-card spade support. A nine-card fit is more powerful than an eight-card fit, particularly when playing in a slam contract. So, it is important to have four-card or longer support in order to use Jacoby 2NT. With only three-card trump support, responder can start by bidding a new suit, planning to raise opener's major strongly on the next round of the auction. How exactly responder continues will depend on whether North-South play Standard American or 2/1 Game Forcing.

### Opener's Rebids

Let's move to the other side of the table and discuss opener's options after responder uses Jacoby 2NT.

South holds this hand as dealer.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJ732<br>♥ KJ5<br>♦ KT4<br>♣ Q8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South opens 1♠, and West passes. North uses the Jacoby 2NT convention, and East passes.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When replying to Jacoby 2NT, opener first looks for shortness - a singleton or void in an unbid suit. With no shortness, opener rebids three of the major, 3NT, or four of the major. To save room for slam investigation when opener has a strong hand, the cheaper bids show more values. The stronger you are, the slower you want the auction to go.

With 12 high-card points, plus 1 length point, South has a minimum-range opening hand. A jump right to 4♠ by South shows around 12-14 points and denies any interest in slam unless responder has considerable extra strength.

### Stronger Hands without Shortness

Let's give opener a stronger hand, 15 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A5<br>♥ KJT63<br>♦ Q8<br>♣ KQT2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East passes as dealer, and South with two doubletons opens 1♥. West passes. North bids 2NT, the Jacoby 2NT convention, and East passes again.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With 16 points, South is too strong to bid 4♥, denying slam interest. There could be slam if North has some extra values, around 16-17 points, and North would pass 4♥ with a hand in that range. Rather than 4♥, South bids 3NT, to show a medium-strength balanced or semi-balanced hand of about 15-17 or 18 points. North will be better placed to decide between stopping in game or moving toward slam.

Let's make South even stronger.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K8<br>♥ AJT52<br>♦ AQJ<br>♣ QJ4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

With 18 high-card points, plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit, South is too strong to open 1NT. South deals and opens 1♥. West passes, and North uses Jacoby 2NT. East passes.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has serious slam interest, even if North has close to a minimum for the Jacoby 2NT response. A 3NT rebid would not show a hand this strong. Instead, South can bid 3♥ with this maximum-strength hand, leaving plenty of room to explore for slam.

Over 3♥, North can bid a new suit to show a control. Here, for example, South wants to hear if North has a club control - the ♣A, the ♣K, a singleton, or a void. Otherwise, there is no chance for slam since the opponents will have two immediate club winners to take.

### When Opener Has Shortness

Now let's suppose opener has shortness, a singleton or void in one of the side suits. Consider this South hand, for example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ852<br>♥ A93<br>♦ 5<br>♣ KQ65</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and passes, and South opens 1♠. West passes, and North bids Jacoby 2NT. East passes again.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

After the 2NT response, a new suit at the three-level shows shortness. With this hand, South rebids 3♦.

Finding out about opener's shortness will help responder decide whether to explore for slam or stop in game.

Here is another hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q954<br>♥ AK832<br>♦ KT63<br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
</table>

South deals and opens 1♥. West passes, and North bids Jacoby 2NT. East passes.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With a void in clubs, opener starts by showing club shortness with a 3♣ rebid. Voids are powerful assets for slam, but 3♣ doesn't yet show a void in clubs. Partner will assume the shortness is a singleton. South might be able to show the void later by making a control-showing bid of 4♣ - after showing shortness, a later control bid in the same suit tends to show a void.

### Showing Extra Length

Opener's final option after responder uses Jacoby 2NT is to show a good five-card side suit by bidding it at the four-level. Showing the second suit can help responder picture opener's hand and assess slam prospects.

Here is an example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT873<br>♥ 6<br>♦ K9<br>♣ AQJ52</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South opens 1♠, West passes, and North bids 2NT, the Jacoby 2NT convention. East passes.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South could bid 3♥ to show the singleton heart, but it is more descriptive to show the good five-card club suit by bidding 4♣. North will know South is at least 5-5 in spades and clubs. North would then appreciate any honors held in clubs, such as the ♣K, which will help solidify South's second suit.

### Exercising Options

When opener holds a five-card side suit, opener will always have a singleton or void in one of the remaining suits as well. After Jacoby 2NT, opener has to decide whether to show the short suit or the long suit with two-suited distribution. One factor is the strength of the side suit. Opener should ideally have two of the top three or three of the top five honors to show the second suit.

Suppose South holds this hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A8<br>♥ KQJ53<br>♦ J9532<br>♣ 6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South opens 1♥, and North bids Jacoby 2NT. South could either bid 3♣, showing the club shortness, or 4♦, showing the five-card diamond suit. The diamonds are weak, and it might be hard to develop tricks in the suit. So opener bids 3♣ to show the club shortness.

Another choice opener might face is which point range to show with no shortness. The point ranges are not set in stone, and sometimes opener will have a borderline hand.

Take this hand, for instance.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQT732<br>♥ AK5<br>♦ T4<br>♣ 73</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South opens 1♠, and West passes. North uses Jacoby 2NT, and East passes.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has 12 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit. That puts South in range for a jump to 4, showing about 12-14 points. However, South's hand is quite suitable for slam. The sixth spade is a positive feature, and the ♥A-K are nice cards for slam. 4♠ is okay, but it would also be reasonable to treat this as a hand of medium strength and bid 3NT.

### Summary

Jacoby 2NT is a useful convention for slam investigation. Knowing all of opener's options over the 2NT response and when to apply judgment will enable a partnership to use the convention more effectively.

## Questions

North-South have agreed to play the Jacoby 2NT convention.

### 01

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ7<br>♥ A7432<br>♦ J8<br>♣ QJ9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**4♥**

With 12 high-card points, plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit, South has a minimum opening bid. South can jump to 4♥, showing around 12-14 points and no shortness in a side suit.

### 02

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, and North-South are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ83<br>♥ A43<br>♦ K8<br>♣ QT62</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2NT**

This is a perfect hand for the Jacoby 2NT convention. South can bid 2NT, showing at least 12 points and at least four spades. 2NT tells North the partnership has a spade fit and belongs in at least a game contract.

### 03

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ KQ543<br>♦ AJ2<br>♣ Q983</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3♠**

After Jacoby 2NT, a new-suit bid by opener at the three-level shows shortness: a singleton or a void. After the 34 bid, North will have a good picture of opener's hand and may be able to move toward a slam contract.

### 04

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKJ82<br>♥ Q93<br>♦ A4<br>♣ KJ2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3♠**

With 18 high-card points, plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit, this is a maximum opening bid. South can bid 3♠, showing about 18 or more points with no shortness. North will show a control in a side suit over 3♠. If North has a heart control, there might be a slam.

### 05

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, and North-South are not. South is the dealer.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K9532<br>♥ AJ94<br>♦ <br>♣ KJ75</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3♦**

A new suit at the three-level shows shortness in that suit - a singleton or a void. At first, North will expect a singleton, but South might be able to make a control-showing bid in diamonds later, suggesting a void.

### 06

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A98<br>♥ QJ4<br>♦ 54<br>♣ AQT72</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♣**

Despite the game-forcing values and heart fit, South does not have a suitable hand for the Jacoby 2NT convention, which promises four or more hearts. With only three-card support, South can start by bidding 2♣, planning to raise hearts later.

### 07

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ653<br>♥ 7<br>♦ AQT42<br>♣ K9</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**4♦**

Another option for opener after the Jacoby 2NT response is to bid a new suit at the four level showing at least a five-card suit that is good enough to be a source of tricks. The 4◆bid gives North an accurate picture of opener's hand.

### 08

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ832<br>♥ KJ32<br>♦ A5<br>♣ J6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3NT**

South has a balanced hand and is too strong to jump to 4♠, which would show around 12-14 points. Instead, South can bid 3NT, showing a medium-strength hand of roughly 15-18 points with no shortness.

### 09

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ954<br>♥ A9<br>♦ 2<br>♣ J8753</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3♦**

4♣ would show a five-card club suit, but South's clubs are too weak. It is more useful to simply show the singleton diamond by bidding 3♦. Bidding 4♣ would mislead North about the strength of South's club suit.

### 10

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 73<br>♥ AJT932<br>♦ 98<br>♣ AK5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**3NT (4♥)**

With this strength and distribution, South would usually bid 4♥, showing around 12-14 points with no singleton or void. However, this hand is highly suitable for playing in a slam contract, So it is reasonable to treat it as a medium-strength hand and bid 3NT. Either call would be acceptable.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/09/01)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/28)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/09)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/04)

### By Date

Use the links below.