---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-01'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/01'

next:
  text: '2024-09-03'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/03'
---

# 2024-09-02

In this deal, the opponents present you with a challenge and so does the play.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 95<br>♥ AJT983<br>♦ AQJ6<br>♣ A</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South with your side vulnerable and the opponents not vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens the bidding 2♠, a weak two-bid. Partner, North, passes, and East raises to 3♠. You have your first chance to make a call.

West has shown a weak hand and East's raise is presumably a further preemptive action designed to make it more challenging for your side to enter the auction... and it has! With 16 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit, you would be comfortable overcalling at the two level or the three level. Now, however, you have to decide whether to come in at the four level. You don't need much from partner to have enough combined strength for game, only about 7 or 8 points. Partner can't be expected to take any action, so it's all up to you. You overcall 4♥, hoping partner will put down a suitable dummy.

Everyone passes and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠A, and dummy comes down with 7 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for each doubleton.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q6<br>♥ Q5<br>♦ T4<br>♣ K876542</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 95<br>♥ AJT983<br>♦ AQJ6<br>♣ A</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Will that be enough?

In planning the play in a suit contract, you start by considering the potential losers you have. There is a potential heart loser since you are missing the ♥K. There are two spade losers, and they will likely be lost right away since West has led the suit. There is a potential diamond loser since the opponents hold the ♦K. There are no club losers. In fact, there is an extra club winner in dummy which could be used to discard a loser from your hand. That's a total of four potential losers: one heart, two spades, and one diamond. That's one more than you can afford. You need to look for a way to eliminate at least one of the losers.

There's nothing which can be done about the spade losers.

You might avoid the heart loser with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♥K. That seems likely since West showed a weak hand and looks to hold the ♠A-K based on the opening lead. You can repeat the finesse, so you will be okay if East started with a singleton, doubleton, or tripleton ♥K.

Similarly, you might avoid the diamond loser with the help of a repeated finesse if East holds the ♦K. Again, that seems likely given West's weak two-bid opening. If necessary, you might be able to ruff a third round of diamonds in dummy, or discard a diamond loser on the ♣K.

When it comes to Consider the Order, however, there's a problem. You don't have an immediate entry to dummy to allow you to take either the heart finesse or the diamond finesse.

Will the opponents help out?

Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠A. That wins the first trick as everyone follows with low spades. West continues with the ♠K, winning the second trick. You are hoping West will help you out be leading either a heart or a diamond. Even a third round of spades would be helpful. However, West shifts to the ♣J and you have no choice but to win with the singleton ♣A in your hand.

You would like to be in dummy but you are going to have to play either a heart or a diamond from your hand. Suppose you decide to play the ♦A. You may be able to get to dummy by ruffing a diamond so you can take the heart finesse. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. You continue with a low diamond to dummy's ♦10 and East wins the ♦K. The ♦K was favorably placed, but you couldn't get to dummy to take a finesse and trap it. At least your remaining diamonds are now winners.

East leads a diamond and West ruffs your diamond winner with a low trump. You can overruff to get to dummy. That was the plan anyway.

Having finally reached dummy, you can try the heart finesse. You lead the low heart from dummy and, when East follows with a low heart, you finesse the ♥J. Success. This wins the trick as West follows with a low heart. East did indeed start with the ♥K. Unfortunately, when you play the ♥A, West shows out, discarding a spade. East started with three hearts, including the ♥K.

You have to lose a trick to East's ♥K, and that's the fourth trick for the defense. You have the rest of the tricks with your heart winners and the established diamond winner, but the contract is down one. You lost two spade tricks, one diamond trick, and one heart trick.

Even though both the ♥K and ♦K were favorably located with East, you didn't have the entries to take enough finesses.

Or did you?

Let's go back and try again.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠A, winning the first trick. West continues with the ♠K, winning the second trick. West switches to a club and you have to win the ♣A in your hand.

You suspect from the auction and the play to the first two tricks that East likely holds the ♥K and ♦K. You'd like to try to trap at least one of the kings, but you have no immediate entry to the dummy. How can you create an entry?

Let's look at the likely layout of the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ Q5<br>♦ T4<br>♣ K87654</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J832<br>♥ 64<br>♦ 82<br>♣ T3</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T<br>♥ K72<br>♦ K9753<br>♣ Q</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ AJT983<br>♦ AQJ6<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

East has both the ♥K and ♦K, as expected. You can't get to dummy in hearts so that you can lead a diamond to trap the ♦K. How can you create an entry to dummy in diamonds so that you can take the heart finesse?

Lead the ♦Q - or ♦J - out of your hand!

East now has no winning answer. If East refuses to win the ♦K, you can then play the ♦A and ruff a diamond to get to dummy. You can then discard the remaining diamond on dummy's club winner - or ruff it in dummy - and all you lose will be a heart trick.

East chooses to win the ♦K. Now, however, you have the entry you need to dummy, the ♦10! East leads a diamond. You play a low diamond and, when West follows with a diamond, you have the entry to dummy you need with the ♦10.

You can now lead the ♥Q from dummy. East chooses to play a low heart, and you play low, winning the trick when West follows with a low heart. You lead dummy's remaining heart and, when East follows with another low heart, you finesse the ♥J. This wins as West follows with another low heart. That's good news. East started with only three hearts. You play the ♥A, and East's ♥K falls on this trick.

You have the rest of the tricks with your two established diamond winners and the remaining trumps. You have made the contract, losing two spade tricks and one diamond trick, but no heart tricks.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q6<br>♥ Q5<br>♦ T4<br>♣ K876542</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKJ832<br>♥ 64<br>♦ 82<br>♣ JT3</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T74<br>♥ K72<br>♦ K9753<br>♣ Q9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 95<br>♥ AJT983<br>♦ AQJ6<br>♣ A</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Entries can be critical for declarer, as illustrated by this deal. To create an entry it may be necessary to sacrifice one trick to gain one or more in return.

On this deal, dummy has some values but neither the ♠Q nor the ♣K are of much use. However, the ♥Q is of value and so is the insignificant-looking ♦10. Declarer can turn the ♦10 into an entry by using either the ♦Q or ♦J to drive out the ♦K. If the defenders don't allow the ♦10 to become an entry, then the fact dummy has only a doubleton diamond comes into play. Dummy actually provided what declarer needed.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/09/02)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/08/31)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/09)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/05)

### By Date

Use the links below.