---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-07'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/07'

next:
  text: '2024-09-09'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/09'
---

# 2024-09-08

Today's column explores when opener should raise responder's major with three-card support.

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

### Raising Responder's Major

After a one-of-a-major response to an opening bid, with a minimum hand of around 12-16 points and four-card support, opener makes a simple raise to two of the major - easy enough. When opener holds three-card support for the major, things are less clear. Sometimes it is right to raise, sometimes it is right not to raise, and sometimes it is a matter of style.

### Raising with a Balanced Hand

When opener has a balanced hand with three-card support, the choice will often be between rebidding 1NT and raising responder's major.

Suppose South holds this hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJ3<br>♥ AK5<br>♦ KT96<br>♣ 732</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South deals and opens 1♦. North responds 1♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When opener holds a balanced hand and three-card support for responder's major, the presumption should be not to raise. Balanced hands don't provide the opportunities to ruff in dummy like unbalanced hands do so they are seldom appropriate for raising on three-card support. With 4-3-3-3-distribution, "seldom' becomes "almost never." Even though opener has no club stopper, 1NT is a standout rebid.

What about with other balanced distributions?

Depending on partnership style, it might be acceptable to raise with three-card support and a doubleton in a side suit. The doubleton might be a useful ruffing value in a suit contract.

Here is a possible hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ7<br>♥ K932<br>♦ K8<br>♣ Q972</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South opens 1♣，and North responds 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has 13 high-card points, and if playing in spades, South can also count 1 dummy point for the doubleton in diamonds. Raising to 2♠ is possible but, with stoppers in both unbid suits, including an honor in the short suit, it looks more descriptive to rebid 1NT than to raise spades. Partnerships can agree to raise on hands like this, but 1NT is the mainstream action.

Let's look at one more balanced hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ7<br>♥ A732<br>♦ A985<br>♣ 86</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South deals and opens 1♦. North responds 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If opener is ever going to raise responder's major with three-card support and a balanced hand, this is the time to do it. Opener has three strong spades and a low doubleton in an unbid suit. If it is right to play notrump, it may be better to play from responder's side. It is equally acceptable to rebid 1 NT with this hand, to show the balanced minimum of 12-14 points. This is a good area for partnerships to discuss.

### No Good Alternative

Most of the time when opener raises responder's major with three-card support, opener will have a singleton or void somewhere. Sometimes, opener will have little choice but to raise responder's major.

Imagine South holds a hand like this.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 9<br>♥ J93<br>♦ KQ42<br>♣ AQ854</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South deals and opens 1♣. North responds 1♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South cannot bid 2♦, because that would be a reverse, showing extra strength - about 17 points or more. Rebidding a five-card club suit is not an appealing choice. It is better to raise hearts with three-card support. The singleton spade makes it likely that the South hand will be a suitable dummy in a heart contract, even if North-South are in a seven-card fit.

Here is another possible hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q73<br>♥ A982<br>♦ KQJ74<br>♣ T</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South opens 1♦ as dealer. North responds 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As before, South lacks the values to bid the four-card heart suit, because that would be a reverse. The diamonds are strong, but with only five of them, raising to 2♠ looks better than rebidding 2♦.

### Raise or Bid a New Suit?

In the previous examples, opener could not show the second suit, lacking the values for a reverse. In many bidding sequences, however, opener will be able to bid the second suit without showing extra strength.

Here is a possible hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ85<br>♥ AJ2<br>♦ 7<br>♣ QJ983</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South opens 1♣, and North responds 1♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

A 1♠ rebid is not a reverse. It is a bid in a higher-ranking suit than opener's first suit, but it merely continues exploring for a fit up the line, so it does not show extra values.

It is reasonable to bid 2♥, and some pairs follow this style. More commonly, though, opener will show the spades, planning on raising hearts later, to show three-card heart support if a spade fit is not found.

Suppose opener's second suit is a minor?

Consider this hand for opener.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT4<br>♥ A9853<br>♦ KQ32<br>♣ 6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South deals and opens 1♥. North responds 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

A 2♦ rebid would not be a reverse, because diamonds are a lower-ranking suit than hearts. Opener could bid 2♦ without showing extra strength.

However, when the choice is between bidding a minor suit or raising a major suit, it is usually preferable to raise the major. Finding a major-suit fit is the first priority in a constructive auction. Bidding 2♠ keeps spades as the focus of the auction.

### When Opener has Extra Values

AlI of the examples so far have featured minimum-range opening bids of about 12-16 points. With hands in that range, it is acceptable to raise responder's major with three-card support. How about stronger hands?

Here is a possible hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ95<br>♥ AQ7<br>♦ 4<br>♣ KJT72</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South deals and opens 1♣. North responds 1♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has 15 high-card points. If considering playing in hearts, South can also count 3 dummy points for the singleton diamond, for a total of 18 points. With 17-18 points and four-card support, opener would raise to 3♥, but opener cannot jump-raise with three-card support. Instead of raising hearts immediately, with 17 points or more and three-card support, opener can bid a different suit, planning on raising hearts later.

Here, opener can rebid 1♠. On the next round of the auction - if there is one - opener can support hearts, maybe by jumping, to show this type of hand.

Here's a similar hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT4<br>♥ 7<br>♦ AK32<br>♣ AJ972</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South opens 1♣ as dealer, and North responds 1♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With 18 total points - at least if South becomes dummy in a spade contract - South is too strong to bid 2♠ and needs another spade to jump to 3♠. A 2♦ rebid would be a reverse, but South has a strong enough hand for it. Opener will be able to show the spade support on the third round of the auction, painting a highly accurate picture of the South hand.

### Raise with a Six-Card Minor?

One more possible hand-type with which opener might raise responder's major suit with three-card support is when opener has six cards in the opened minor.

Take this hand, for instance.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q92<br>♥ AQJ<br>♦ KT8653<br>♣ 4</td>
	</tr>
</table>

South deals and opens 1♦ and North responds 1♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Opener's normal rebid with six cards in the minor and three-card support for responder's major is two of the minor. With a strong three-card holding for the major and a weak minor suit, however, it is possible to raise the major instead of rebidding the minor. This is again a matter of a style: it is acceptable to rebid the minor or to raise the major.

### Summary

It is important for partnerships to agree when opener can raise responder's major with three-card support as it is a key part of accurate constructive bidding. Raise too often and you will play more than a few inferior 4-3 fits. Raise too little and you will miss some good fits and have to misdescribe other hands.

## Questions

### 01

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A83<br>♥ QJT2<br>♦ Q95<br>♣ AT6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1NT**

There are some hands with three-card spade support where it might be best to raise spades, but this is not one of them. A raise to 2♠ should deliver four-card support or an unbalanced hand suitable for playing in spades.

### 02

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, and North-South are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJT8<br>♥ A43<br>♦ 8<br>♣ A7532</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>
	
#### Suggested Answer

**1♠ (2♥)**

Opener could raise to 2♥, but being able to introduce spades at the one-level takes precedence for most partnerships, as partner may hold four hearts and four spades.

It is reasonable to raise to 2♥ with this hand-type - it is just a question of style.

### 03

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ JT8<br>♥ AQ73<br>♦ 9<br>♣ AJ954</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♠**

2♥ would be a reverse, showing around 17 points or more, so that's out of the question. Raising to 2♠ with three-card support and a side singleton is a better description of opener's hand than rebidding the so-so five-card club suit.

### 04

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K9<br>♥ KT3<br>♦ KJ92<br>♣ KT64</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1NT (2♥)**

With a minimum-range balanced hand, South's normal rebid is 1NT.

Some partnerships prefer to raise to 2♥ on hands like this, but the strong doubleton makes this hand more oriented toward play in notrump than in a suit contract.

### 05

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, and North-South are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJ93<br>♥ A83<br>♦ AKJ43<br>♣ 7</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1♠**

With a weaker hand, South would have the option of raising to 2♥. With 15 high-card points, plus 3 dummy points for the singleton club, however, South is too strong for 2♥. Instead, South can bid 1♠ first and raise hearts later - assuming that 1♠ doesn't end the auction, of course.

### 06

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ QJ7<br>♦ Q9853<br>♣ AK82</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♥ (2♣)**

South can show the clubs without overstating the strength of opener's hand. However, major suits are the focus of constructive bidding. Raising to 2♥ emphasizes the hearts, which - with the singleton spade - looks like the key feature of the South hand.

### 07

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J<br>♥ K96<br>♦ AT62<br>♣ KJ743</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♥**

South does not have the strength for a reverse into 2♦. With three-card heart support and a singleton spade, raising to 2♥ is a better description than rebidding the five-card club suit.

### 08

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK5<br>♥ 8<br>♦ J93<br>♣ AT7432</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♠ (2♣)**

South will often rebid 2♣ with this distribution, and that is a perfectly acceptable call.

With strong spades and mediocre clubs, however, 2♠ may be superior to 2♣, because it makes the major suit the primary focus of the auction.

### 09

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 93<br>♥ AQ4<br>♦ AK52<br>♣ T954</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♥ (1NT)**

South has a minimum balanced hand, so rebidding 1NT would not be wrong.

However, if opener is ever to raise responder's major suit with a balanced hand and only three-card support, this is the time. Some partnerships will raise with this hand because of the worthless doubleton, and others will not. It's a matter of partnership style.

### 10

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJT<br>♥ KQ73<br>♦ AQJ62<br>♣ 6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♥**

South has a good hand for play in spades - 16 high-card points, plus 3 dummy points- but South cannot raise strongly with only three-card support. Instead, South can bid 2♥, a reverse, showing 17 points or more and forcing. South will then raise spades, showing a strong hand with only three-card support.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/09/08)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/04)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/09)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/11)

### By Date

Use the links below.