---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-14'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/14'

next:
  text: '2024-09-16'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/16'
---

# 2024-09-15

Today's column takes a look at one-level overcalls.

<Badge type="danger" text="Bid"/>

## Introduction

### One-Level Overcalls

After an opponent opens the bidding, one of the most important ways you can enter the auction is by overcalling. Overcalling can help you compete for a partscore contract, investigate a game contract, or direct the opening lead. The overcall may also make it more difficult for the opponents' to find their best contract. For these reasons, it is important to overcall at the one level on hands not strong enough to open the bidding.

A one-level overcall shows about 7-17 points and a five-card or longer suit - preferably a good suit.

Here is a possible hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 87<br>♥ KQJ85<br>♦ 32<br>♣ T953</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and opens the bidding 1♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has 6 high-card points plus 1 length point for the fifth heart. This is a dead minimum for a one-level overcall. It is worth bidding 1♥, in large part because the heart suit is so strong. If West ends up as declarer, it is very likely that a heart opening lead will be the best start for the defense. If South does not bid 1♥ now, North may make a less effective opening lead.

To what lengths should you go to direct the lead with an overcall?

Here, South has a slightly weaker hand.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJT85<br>♥ 83<br>♦ 952<br>♣ T75</td>
	</tr>
</table>

As in the previous example, East deals and opens the bidding 1♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The recommended minimum of 7 points for a one-level overcall is a good guideline, and it is rarely beneficial to dip below it. This hand is close to the threshold for a one-level overcall, but with only 5 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit, it looks better to pass.

Let's look at a slightly stronger hand for South, but with a weaker suit.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K8<br>♥ Q7632<br>♦ KJ5<br>♣ T92</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and opens the bidding 1♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has 9 high-card points, plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit - enough for a 1♥ overcall. However, with a weak suit and a minimum-range hand, it may be more prudent to pass instead. A weak suit makes it less likely that a heart opening lead will be best for North-South, and a 1♥ overcall might steer partner in the wrong direction.

How strong a suit does South need to overcall at the one level?

Here is the same hand for South with the ♥K instead of the ♠K.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 83<br>♥ KQ762<br>♦ KJ5<br>♣ T92</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Again, East opens the bidding 1♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With two high honors, the heart suit is easily strong enough for a one-level overcall. South has enough strength, as well: 9 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit.

A weak suit is not necessarily an impediment to overcalling.

Consider this South hand, for example.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K8732<br>♥ AQ9<br>♦ KT74<br>♣ 5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

The spade suit is ragged, but South has 13 points, 12 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit.

East deals and opens the bidding 1♦.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With weaker hands, it is reasonable to pass rather than bid a weak suit. However, it is usually best to overcall stronger hands such as this. Directing the best opening lead is now not the only concern. When South has a stronger hand, it is more likely North-South can compete for a partscore or find a game contract. Those factors make overcalling more attractive.

### Choosing Among Alternatives

In the previous examples, South's decision has been whether to pass or make a simple overcall. Other times, South will have to choose between overcalling at the one level and taking some other action.

After East deals and opens the bidding 1♣, this South hand provides another challenge: which suit to overcall.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KJ632<br>♥ 7<br>♦ KQJT5<br>♣ 42</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The diamond suit is stronger than the spade suit but, when choosing whether to overcall two suits of the same length, it is almost always preferable to overcall the major. Finding a major-suit fit is more important than finding a minor-suit fit. Additionally, it may be convenient for South to bid diamonds on the next round of the auction after overcalling 1♠.

Here is a different hand for South, where the choice is between overcalling the five-card suit or making a takeout double after East deals and opens the bidding 1♣.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K953<br>♥ AQ2<br>♦ KJT85<br>♣ 6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

The diamond suit is easily strong enough to overcall. However, with support for all three unbid suits, South's hand is also suitable for a takeout double. In general, it is preferable to make a takeout double rather than overcall a five-card minor. The takeout double brings the major suits into focus, while a 1♦ overcall would not suggest length and strength in the majors.

Here is a similar hand for South, with a five-card major suit instead of a five-card minor suit.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT4<br>♥ AQ982<br>♦ QJT3<br>♣ 6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East opens the bidding 1♣ and, once again, the question is between a one-level overcall and a takeout double.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

A takeout double is not out of the question but, with a strong five-card major, it often works better to overcall the major rather than double. After a takeout double, it may be difficult for South to show the five-card heart suit. After a 1♥ overcall, however, North may be able to bid spades or South may be able to double a club bid for takeout later in the auction - showing length in spades and diamonds.

Let's look at another hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 7<br>♥ KQJ762<br>♦ J93<br>♣ 532</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and opens the bidding 1♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Here, the question is not whether to bid the long suit, but at what level to bid it.

The hearts are strong, and South has 9 points - 7 high-card points, plus 2 length points for the six-card heart suit. So South is in range for a 1♥ overcall. However, a weak jump overcall of 2♥ is a more descriptive bid. It shows around 6-11 points with a strong six-card heart suit. 2♥ gives North a better description of the South hand while taking up bidding room from East-West.

Here is one final hand for South.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ83<br>♥ AK3<br>♦ 92<br>♣ KJ5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East deals and opens the bidding 1♣.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

South has 18 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. The hand is too strong for a 1♠ overcall. With a hand too strong to overcall, South can begin with a takeout double. Normally, double shows support for all the unbid suits, but it can also show a very strong hand. After doubling, South plans to bid spades voluntarily next, showing 18 points or more and at least five spades.

### Summary

One-level overcalls are some of the most common competitive actions in bridge. Knowing when to make them - and, equally important, when not to make them - will help you compete more effectively in contested auctions.

## Questions

### 01

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ974<br>♥ A83<br>♦ 52<br>♣ 743</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1♠**

With 9 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit, this hand is in the minimum range for a one-level overcall. However, the spade suit is quite sufficient for a one-level overcall.

### 02

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, and North-South are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 8<br>♥ Q9643<br>♦ AK5<br>♣ K872</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1♥**

South's hearts are weaker than the ideal for a 1♥ overcall. Still, with 12 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit, South is strong enough to overcall, despite the weak suit.

### 03

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 96<br>♥ KJT85<br>♦ 7432<br>♣ T7</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass**

The heart suit is easily strong enough for an overcall, but South's hand is too weak to take any action. A one-level overcall shows about 7-17 points. With 4 high-card points and 1 length point for the five-card heart suit, South is short of the minimum strength partner will expect for an overcall.

### 04

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ6<br>♥ Q852<br>♦ AQ973<br>♣ 7</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double (1♦)**

South comfortably meets the criteria for a 1♦ overcall, with 13 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. Usually, however, it is preferable to make a takeout double with suitable distribution in the major suits rather than overcall a five-card minor.

### 05

You are South. East-West are vulnerable, and North-South are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ652<br>♥ T<br>♦ 982<br>♣ 532</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**2♠**

This hand meets the requirements for a 1♦ overcall, but there is a more descriptive call available. A weak jump overcall of 2♦ shows a good six-card suit with little outside - about 6-11 points.

### 06

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT843<br>♥ 73<br>♦ AQJ92<br>♣ 6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1♠**

South has more than enough strength to overcall, but which suit to bid?

The diamonds are stronger, but the priority is to find a major-suit fit. Also, after bidding 1♠, it may be convenient to bid diamonds later.

### 07

You are South. East-West are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQT65<br>♥ 8<br>♦ 643<br>♣ 9832</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1♠**

With 6 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit, this is a bare-minimum 1♠ overcall. With such strong spades, the benefits of overcalling outweigh the risks of bidding with such a weak hand.

### 08

You are South. North-South are vulnerable, and East-West are not.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q8<br>♥ AKJ93<br>♦ A72<br>♣ A95</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Double**

South has appropriate distribution for a 1♥ overcall and a strong suit. However, with 18 high-card points plus 1 length point, South is too strong for 1♥, which tends to be limited to about 17 points. Instead, South can double, planning to bid hearts next, showing a strong hand.

### 09

You are South. Both sides are vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J8654<br>♥ A2<br>♦ K93<br>♣ T64</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**Pass (1♠)**

South has 8 high-card points and 1 length point - technically, enough to overcall 1♠. With a minimum hand and such a weak suit, however, South may be better off passing.

### 10

You are South. Neither side is vulnerable.

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ972<br>♥ A64<br>♦ 3<br>♣ K852</td>
	</tr>
</table>

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>?</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Suggested Answer

**1♠**

If South's five-card suit were an unbid minor, it might be preferable to make a takeout double, rather than overcall. With a five-card major suit, however, it is usually better to overcall, unless the suit is very weak. The spade suit here is strong enough for an overcall.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/09/15)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/11)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/09)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/18)

### By Date

Use the links below.