---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-16'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/16'

next:
  text: '2024-09-18'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/18'
---

# 2024-09-17

In today's deal, are you and partner giving one another the right messages?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 8<br>♥ AQ65<br>♦ T9842<br>♣ 853</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 1♠. You have to decide what call to make.

You have only 6 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. There's no reason to do anything except pass for now.

West makes an invitational limit raise to 3♠, showing four-card spade support and about 10-12 points. Your partner, North, passes, and East accepts the invitation and bids 4♠. You have another chance to make a call.

You have nothing to say at this level.

West and partner both pass, ending the auction. You now have to choose an opening lead against East's 4e contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

On leading against a suit contract, it is usually not a good idea to lead an ace from an unbid suit when not holding the king or shortness. It is usually better to lead from a suit headed by a solid sequence. So, with no other information to go on from this auction, a diamond lead looks best from this hand. From a solid sequence headed by an honor, you lead the top of the touching cards.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♦10 and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ6<br>♥ 843<br>♦ QJ6<br>♣ 642</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 8<br>♥ AQ65<br>♦ T9842<br>♣ 853</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays the ♦J from dummy, and partner wins the trick with the ♦A as declarer follows with the ♦3. That looks like a good start for your side. Even better, partner continues with the ♦K and declarer plays the ♦7. Your side is winning the first two tricks. However, you have a key decision to make. What are you playing to this trick?

Suppose you play a low diamond. Let's see what will happen next.

Partner leads the ♣J. Declarer wins the trick with the ♣K as you make a discouraging attitude signal with a low club. That's too bad. You wanted partner to lead a heart rather than a club.

Declarer can now draw trumps and will lose a trick to your ♥A, but that's all. Your side took only two diamonds and a heart, not enough to defeat the contract.

What could you have done? Let's try again.

## Another Possible Defense

You lead the ♦10 and partner wins the first trick with the ♦A. Partner continues with the ♦K and declarer follows with the ♦7. After winning this trick, partner is going to have to decide what to lead next. You have a strong preference for hearts rather than clubs. How can you send that message?

In a situation like this, when partner is going to have to decide what to lead next, you are sometimes in a position to give a suit preference. By playing the highest card you can afford, you show a preference for the higher-ranking of the "obvious" suits, hearts in this case. By playing the lowest card, you would be showing a preference for the lower-ranking suit, clubs in this case. With no preference for either suit, you can play a middle card when you have a choice. Of course, you won't always have a wide choice of cards to play. You'll have to do the best you can and hope partner interprets your card appropriately.

With a distinct preference for partner to lead a heart, you should play the ♦9. The ♦2, your lowest remaining diamond, would send the message that you want partner to lead a club. One of your middle diamonds, the ♦8 or ♦4, would say you have no preference for either suit.

This time, partner gets your message and leads the ♥J. Declarer plays the ♥K and you win the ♥A. Well done, partner. What now?

It may seem like a good idea to take the ♥Q. You don't want to give declarer an opportunity to discard any remaining heart losers. Let's see what will happen if you try to take your other heart winner.

When you lead the ♥Q, dummy and partner follow suit, but declarer ruffs with a low spade. Declarer proceeds to take the rest of the tricks, again making 4♠.

That's too bad. Well, at least partner got your message about shifting to a heart rather than a club.

Could you have done any better?

Let's try once more, because partner was also sending you a message!

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♦10 and partner wins the first trick with the ♦A. That seems normal enough. No message from partner there. Partner continues with the ♦K. That does send a message. What is partner telling you?

Partner has only two diamonds!

When playing third hand high to a trick, you normally play only as high as necessary. With three or more diamonds headed by the ♦A-K, the usual play would be the ♦K. When that wins the trick, it tells partner that you also have the ♦A unless declarer is holding up for some reason. So partner would have played the ♦K and then the ♦A if holding three or more diamonds.

Partner's unusual play is a message telling you that partner started with specifically a doubleton ♦A-K. Since you started with five diamonds and dummy with three, declarer must have started with three diamonds.

So, on this trick, you carefully play the ♦9, sending the message that you want partner to lead a heart, not a club. Partner dutifully shifts to the VJ, and you win declarer's ♥K with the ♥A. Now what?

Trusting partner's signal, you lead another diamond. You might as well lead the ♦8, a further suit preference signal, telling partner to lead another heart if partner gains the lead.

As you expected from partner's message, partner ruffs this trick as declarer follows suit. That's the fourth trick for the defense. Partner leads another heart, but declarer ruffs. It's a good thing you didn't try to take the ♥Q before giving partner a diamond ruff.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but that's okay. Your side has the first four tricks: two diamonds, a heart, and a **diamond ruff**.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 53<br>♥ JT972<br>♦ AK<br>♣ JT97</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJ6<br>♥ 843<br>♦ QJ6<br>♣ 642</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KT9742<br>♥ K<br>♦ 753<br>♣ AKQ</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 8<br>♥ AQ65<br>♦ T9842<br>♣ 853</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, both partners must work together to defeat the contract. Partner has to send you the message that partner started with only a doubleton diamond. You have to send the message that your entry is in hearts. Partner has to trust your message and lead a heart rather than a club. You have to trust partner's message and give partner a diamond ruff rather than trying to take a second heart trick.

That's what partnership defense is all about.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/09/17)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/13)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/09)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/24)

### By Date

Use the links below.