---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-19'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/19'

next:
  text: '2024-09-21'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/21'
---

# 2024-09-20

On this deal, can you be certain how to play a critical suit?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ976<br>♥ J6<br>♦ KJ6<br>♣ Q84</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South, and both sides are vulnerable. West is the dealer and passes. Your partner, North, opens 1♣. East passes, and you have to decide what to respond with this hand.

You have 13 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. With opening values opposite partner's opening bid, there should be at least enough combined strength for game. The first step, however, is to decide Where the partnership belongs. You can start by showing your spade suit. The response in a new suit at the one level is forcing.

West now overcalls 2♥. Partner raises your suit to 2♠, and East passes. You have to choose a rebid.

Partner's raise to the two level shows three-card or longer spade support and a minimum-strength opening bid. Having found a major-suit fit, you now know Where the partnership belongs, spades. Since partner is limited to about 16 points, you also know How High, game. You simply put the partnership in game in spades.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>2♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥A, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJ63<br>♥ 7543<br>♦ T9<br>♣ AKJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ976<br>♥ J6<br>♦ KJ6<br>♣ Q84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has only 12 high-card points but does have four-card spade support and a doubleton diamond.

In planning the play in a suit contract, the first step is to consider the number of losers you have in 4♠. Even if the four missing spades are divided 4-0, you have no spade losers. You have the four top honors. You have two sure heart losers. It looks as though you are about to lose them right away since West has led the suit. There are no club losers, but there are two potential diamond losers since the opponents have both the ♦A and ♦Q. So you have four potential losers: two hearts and two diamonds.

You can't do anything about the two heart losers and the ♦A. So the contract is going to hinge on holding the diamond losers to one. You don't have to worry about the third diamond in your hand since you can always ruff it in dummy. So you will need to avoid losing a trick to the ♦Q.

If East holds the ♦Q, you can lead a diamond from dummy and play low, taking a finesse against the ♦Q. If that works, it won't matter which defender holds the ♦A. If West holds the ♦Q, then there is nothing you can do if West also holds the ♦A. So you will have to hope East holds the ♦A and, when you lead a diamond from dummy, you must play the ♦K if East follows with a low diamond. Do you have enough information at this point to decide which diamond to play from your hand when you lead a diamond from dummy?

No.

West has overcalled 2♥ during the auction, but you are missing enough high cards that either defender could hold the ♦A and ♦Q. What is your plan for playing the diamond suit?

Wait and see!

You don't have to decide right now. You can wait and see how the play starts off before you decide. West might even lead a diamond and you then won't have to guess what to do.

So let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West leads the ♥A and wins the first trick as East plays the ♥9. West continues with the ♥K, which wins the second trick as East plays the ♥2, finishing an encouraging high-low attitude signal. West now plays the ♥Q, and East discards a low club. You ruff with a low spade, finally winning a trick.

No reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. Both defenders follow with low spades when you play the ♠A. You continue with a spade to dummy's ♠K, and both defenders follow again. That takes care of the outstanding trumps.

You could try playing the diamond suit now, but there's no hurry. You want to get as much information as possible, and maybe one of the defenders will make a helpful signal or discard. Both defenders follow when you play the ♣A. You continue with the K, and both defenders again follow with low clubs. You take your last club winner, and again, both defenders follow suit. Not much help there.

You can't put off the diamond play much longer. You need to be in dummy to lead a diamond, so you cross with a spade. West discards the ♥8 and East the ♦2. Does that tell you anything?

Not really. West can afford to discard a heart. West still has the ♥10 remaining. East's ♦2 looks like it might be a discouraging attitude signal, but you can't trust the opponents at this point. They both know you are coming down to playing the diamond suit, and they don't want to give you any help.

It's decision time. You lead dummy's ♦10 - just in case East wants to cover an honor with an honor - but East simply follows with a low diamond. Since West came into the auction with a 2♥ overcall, it might look as though West is more likely to hold the ♦A. So let's see what will happen if you play a low diamond, hoping West will win with the ♦A.

West indeed wins the trick, but it's with the ♦Q. West returns a diamond, and East wins the ♦A, the fourth trick for the defense.

4♠ is down one, having lost two hearts and two diamonds.

Were you just unlucky with your diamond guess?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West wins the first trick with the ♥A. West also wins the second trick with the ♥K. At trick three, West continues with the ♥Q. East discards a low club and you ruff the trick. You now draw the defenders' trumps in two rounds with the ♠A and ♠K. You take your club winners, with both defenders following suit in all three rounds. You cross to the ♠J, so you can lead a diamond from dummy. On this trick, West discards the ♥8 and East the ♦2.

You now lead dummy's ♦10 and East follows with the ♦5. You can only afford to lose one diamond, so you have two choices. You can play low and take a finesse against the hoped-for ♦Q in East's hand. If West wins the ♦A, your ♦K will become a winner. Or you can play the ♦K, hoping East holds the ♦A. Do you have the information you need to decide which is right?

Yes!

What do you know from the play so far?

West started with five hearts headed by the ♥A-K-Q, two spades, and three clubs. West started with three diamonds. East started with two hearts, two spades, four clubs, and therefore five diamonds. That doesn't tell you who holds the ♦A or ♦Q. What other source of information do you have?

The auction!

West overcalled 2♥ during the auction. That would usually be an indication that West is more likely to hold the ♦A along with
the ♥A-K-Q. Is there any reason to think otherwise?

Yes. West passed initially!

With a five-card heart suit headed by the ♥A-K-Q along with the ♦A, West would certainly have opened the bidding. So West can't hold the ♦A. It must be with East.

Having done your detective work, you confidently play the ♦K. West follows with a low diamond. Success.

The rest is easy. You give up a diamond trick and are happy to see West wins it with the ♦Q. If you misguessed diamonds, you would have gone down.

You have the last two tricks and have made your 4♠ contract. You lost the two heart tricks and only the **one** diamond trick you had to lose.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KJ63<br>♥ 7543<br>♦ T9<br>♣ AKJ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 82<br>♥ AKQT8<br>♦ Q84<br>♣ 952</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T4<br>♥ 92<br>♦ A7532<br>♣ T763</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ976<br>♥ J6<br>♦ KJ6<br>♣ Q84</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When you have a guess to make, it's almost always best to wait and get as much information as you can before playing the suit. Sometimes, the opponents will help you out with their discards and signals. Sometimes, they might even lead the suit for you. However, your clues come from both the play and the auction. So it's always a good idea to review the auction while planning the play. You don't want to forget the bids that were made... or the passes.

On this deal, you could play the diamond suit correctly as soon as West shows up with the ♥A-K-Q and passed originally. However, it doesn't hurt to take your time.

You try to construct a picture of the opponents' hands that is consistent with the bidding and the play. It won't always be possible, but it will certainly reduce the number of pure "guesses" you have to make.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/09/20)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/19)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/09)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/21)

### By Date

Use the links below.