---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-26'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/26'

next:
  text: '2024-09-28'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/28'
---

# 2024-09-27

On this deal, you have to choose among several lines of play.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ<br>♥ Q743<br>♦ KQJT6<br>♣ AK</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South and both sides are vulnerable. East is the dealer and opens 1♠. What call are you going to make with the South hand?

You have 21 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. That's much too strong for a simple overcall. Even though the hand is semi-balanced and you have stoppers in the opponent's suit, you can't jump to 2NT since that would be the unusual 2NT convention. Instead, you start with a takeout double, planning to bid again.

West passes. Partner, North, advances to 2♣. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

You could bid 2♦, showing a hand too strong to overcall 1♦, but your hand is stronger than partner will expect. Since the hand is semi-balanced with two spade stoppers, a more descriptive bid is 2NT, showing a hand too strong to overcall 1NT. You aren't quite strong enough to jump to 3NT. You forced partner to bid something by making a takeout double, and partner could have nothing at all. East has an opening bid or better.

West passes, and partner raises to 3NT. East passes, and the auction is back again to you.

You have described the strength of your hand with the double followed by the notrump bid. Partner presumably has a few values, enough to take you to a game contract. However, partner made a minimum advance initially, showing about 0-8 points. So you have no reason to do anything except pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠9, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 752<br>♥ KT<br>♦ 85<br>♣ QJ8654</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ<br>♥ Q743<br>♦ KQJT6<br>♣ AK</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has a little something, 6 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card club suit.

In planning the play in 3NT, start by counting the sure tricks. How many do you have?

You start with only one sure spade winner but, since West has led a spade, you are guaranteed a second trick no matter what East plays to the first trick. There are no sure heart tricks since the opponents hold the ♥A. Assuming the defenders' five clubs are divided no worse than 4-1, you appear to have six sure club tricks. Despite the strong diamond holding, you have no sure tricks since the opponents have the ♦A. That's a total of eight immediate winners. It looks as though you need to find only one more trick to make 3NT.

You can't get any more winners from the spade or club suits. In hearts, you can promote a winner by driving out the ♥A. If West holds the ♥J, you could actually develop two winners by first finessing dummy's ♥10.

You can promote three diamond winners by driving out the ♦A. As long as the defenders' six diamonds divide no worse than 4-2, you will get a fourth diamond winner through length.

So you appear to have lots of tricks. Is there a problem?

Yes!

The club suit is blocked. After taking the ♣A-K, you will need an entry to dummy to take the rest of the club winners. Do you have an entry to dummy?

No.

There is no sure entry to dummy. The ♥K is a possible entry. You could lead a low heart toward dummy, hoping West holds the ♥A. Is it likely West holds the ♥A?

No.

East opened the bidding and there are only 13 high-card points missing. East must hold the ♥A to have enough to open. East must also hold the ♦A.

Another possibility is to lead a low heart toward dummy and finesse the ♥10, hoping West holds the ♥J. If East doesn't take the ♥A, you will be in dummy. If East does win the▼A, dummy's ♥K will be an entry. Could West hold the ♥J?

Possibly.

East might have opened with 11 or 12 high-card points and a five-card or longer spade suit.

If you can only get two tricks from the club suit, do you have any other options for making the contract?

You can establish four diamond tricks by driving out the ♦A and a fifth trick by driving out the ♥A. Together with the two spade tricks and two club tricks, that's nine tricks. Is there a problem with this plan?

Yes!

How many spades does East hold?

At least five. Likely six. Perhaps seven.

East opened 1♠, showing a five-card or longer suit. West has led the ♠9, which is presumably either a singleton or top of a doubleton. With three spades, West would likely start with a low spade. Since you have only two spade stoppers, and one of those is going to be driven out at trick one, it appears that East will win the race to establish winners. And you've already determined from the auction that it is East who holds both the missing aces.

Let's see what is likely to happen.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠9. You play low from dummy, East plays the ♠K, and you win the ♠A. You are at the critical point in the play. What are you leading at trick two?

It seems natural to start with the long suit, so let's see what will happen if you lead a diamond at trick two.

You lead a high diamond, and East wins the ♦A.

East leads a spade, driving out the ♠Q.

When you continue with a high diamond, both defenders follow suit. The good news is the diamonds haven't divided 5-1. The rest of your diamonds are winners. The bad news is you have only eight tricks: two spades, two clubs, and four diamonds.

As soon as you try to promote a heart trick, East will win the ♥A and take the rest of the tricks with the established spades. Down one.

Should you have tried to get to dummy with a heart?

Let's see.

## Another Possible Play

West leads the ♠9, and you win the first trick.

In case you are able to reach dummy, you need to unblock the club suit. You take a trick with the ♣A. You continue with the ♣K.

Suppose you try to get to dummy by leading a low heart to dummy's ♥K. As you "knew" would happen, East wins the ♥A. East leads a spade, driving out the ♠Q.

You have the heart trick you need, but you still need to promote the diamond winners you need. When you lead the ♦K, however, East wins the ♦A... as you "knew" would happen.

East now takes the four established spade tricks. Together with the two aces, that's six tricks. This time, 3NT is down two. That's worse than going after diamonds first.

Perhaps you should have tried the heart finesse. Let's see.

## One More Possible Play

West leads the ♠9, and you win the first trick. You unblock the ♣A and ♣K. You lead a low heart and, when West follows low, you finesse dummy's ♥10. If East has to win this with the ♥A, you will have the entry to dummy that you need. You won't have to establish any tricks in diamonds. You'll have two spades, a heart, and six clubs.

Oops. East wins the ♥J. That's not good. East now leads a spade, and there goes the ♠Q.

Things are worse than ever since you don't even have a heart trick. Whether you lead a heart or a diamond, East will win and have four spades to take, along with a diamond and **two** heart tricks. 3NT is down three.

So let's see what you could have done to make the contract.

## Recommended Play

Once again, you win the first spade trick. You unblock the ♣A. You unblock the ♣K.

You've seen that leading a diamond won't work. You'll end up down one. Leading a heart to dummy's ♥K won't work. You'll go down two tricks. Leading a heart and finessing dummy's ♥10 won't work. That leads to down three when the finesse loses. Is there anything that will work at this point?

Yes. Leading the ♥Q!

Let's look at the remaining cards to see why this gives East an insoluble dilemma.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 75<br>♥ KT<br>♦ 85<br>♣ QJ86</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 6<br>♥ 9652<br>♦ 9432<br>♣ T</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ JT843<br>♥ AJ8<br>♦ A7<br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q<br>♥ Q743<br>♦ KQJT6<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

When West and dummy play low hearts, what is East to do?

If East plays a low heart, you will have the extra heart winner you need and can now drive out the ♦A while you still have the ♠Q. You'll get two spades, two clubs, four diamonds, and the heart trick that East let you win.

And suppose East wins the ♥A. East can drive out your remaining ♠Q. But now you no longer need to establish any diamond tricks. You can get to dummy with the ♥K. And you can take the four club winners. That gives you nine tricks. You don't get any diamond tricks, but you do get two spades, one heart, and six club tricks. East has the last three tricks, but that's fine.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 752<br>♥ KT<br>♦ 85<br>♣ QJ8654</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 96<br>♥ 9652<br>♦ 9432<br>♣ T93</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KJT843<br>♥ AJ8<br>♦ A7<br>♣ 72</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ<br>♥ Q743<br>♦ KQJT6<br>♣ AK</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The clues are there as soon as West makes the opening lead and dummy comes down. You know East has six or more spades along with the two missing aces. It now becomes a challenge to decide what you can do with this information.

You need to walk through the various scenarios. What will happen if you lead a diamond at trick two? What if you unblock the clubs and lead a heart to dummy's▼K? Or a heart to dummy's ♥10?

Leading a heart to dummy's ♥10 is the only one of these lines that has a chance. However, the odds are against West holding the ♥J.

Having gone through the problems with each of these lines of play, hopefully you can come up with the scenario of leading the ♥Q. It gives East a choice of poisons: Win the ♥A and give you an entry to dummy's clubs; Duck the ♥A and let you establish the diamond suit.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/09/27)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/26)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/09)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/28)

### By Date

Use the links below.