---
prev:
  text: '2024-09-29'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/09/29'

next:
  text: '2024-10-01'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/01'
---

# 2024-09-30

In today's column, the partnership hands don't fit well together, but can you still make the contract?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKQJ<br>♥ KT5<br>♦ A75432<br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. North and South are vulnerable, and East and West are not. As dealer there is a chance to choose an opening call.

There are 17 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card diamond suit. That puts the hand in the top range for an opening bid at the one level. You start by opening the bidding in the six-card diamond suit, 1♦.

West passes. North responds 2♣. East passes. It's time to choose a rebid.

You can now show the four-card spade suit. That's more descriptive than rebidding the six-card diamond suit. The 2♠ rebid is forcing.

West passes. North rebids 3♣, and East passes. There is another chance to select a call.

You have a strong hand and partner has shown some values, so slam is a possibility. However, the partnership hands don't seem to fit well together. You have a void in partner's suit and partner hasn't shown support for either of your suits. You want to be cautious about getting too high. You could rebid the six-card diamond suit, but the suit quality isn't that great. Besides, you have a stopper in the unbid suit, hearts. This may be the last chance to suggest playing game in notrump. Let's go with 3NT. Everyone passes, ending the auction. You are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥3.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 95<br>♥ J98<br>♦ T8<br>♣ AKQ753</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQJ<br>♥ KT5<br>♦ A75432<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has a 10 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card club suit.

Making 3NT requires nine tricks. Playing in notrump, begin by counting the sure tricks. You don't start with any sure heart tricks. West has led a heart, however, so you are guaranteed a heart trick no matter what East plays to the first trick. There are four sure spade tricks, the ♠A-K-Q-J. There is one sure diamond winner, your ♦A. There are three sure club tricks, dummy's ♣A-K-Q. That's a total of nine winners: one heart, four spades, one diamond, and three clubs. You don't need to establish any additional tricks and can move to the third stage of the plan, Consider the Order.

There is a potential problem since there is no immediate entry to dummy's clubs. If you can't reach the clubs, perhaps you can put the defenders on lead and maybe they will lead a club for you. Will that work?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥3. The ♥8 is played from dummy and East wins the ♥A. That establishes your ♥K as a winner, as you were expecting.

Suppose you play a low heart. East returns the ♥6. You can hope East holds the ♥Q so you can get to dummy with the ♥J. Unfortunately, West wins the ♥Q. West leads another heart and you win the ♥K.

You can take the four spade winners so the defenders can't lead a spade when they gain the lead. West follows to three rounds and then discards a club. East follows to all four rounds. You next take the ♦A. East plays the ♦Q. You are hoping East might have started with a doubleton ♦K-Q and will have nothing left to lead but clubs on gaining the lead.

You lead another diamond. Unfortunately, it is West who wins the ♦J as East shows out, discarding a club. West takes the established heart winner. West has two more diamond winners to take.

West finally has to lead a club and you get one of dummy's club winners. However, the contract has gone down two. You couldn't reach dummy's clubs and the defenders' diamonds divided 4-1.

Could you have done anything more?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥3 and the ♥8 is played from dummy. East wins the trick with the ♥A.

Before automatically following with the ♥5, you need to consider the situation. You desperately need an entry to dummy and West's heart lead has given you the opportunity to create one. If you follow with a low heart, it's unlikely you can get to dummy with a heart. If you unblock the ♥K, however, the defenders can't prevent you getting to dummy with a heart. Let's see.

You play the ♥K under East's ♥A!

East returns a heart. You play low, and West wins the ♥Q. You've now recovered the heart trick you gave up at trick one and have also created an entry to dummy at the same time.

West leads a third round of hearts and dummy's ♥J wins. You are where you want to be. You can take dummy's three club winners. You can then cross to your hand with a spade to take the four spade winners. The ♦A is your ninth trick.

The defenders have the last two tricks, but you have made the contract. You took one heart trick, four spade tricks, one diamond trick, and three club tricks.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 95<br>♥ J98<br>♦ T8<br>♣ AKQ753</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 874<br>♥ Q743<br>♦ KJ96<br>♣ 92</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T632<br>♥ A62<br>♦ Q<br>♣ JT864</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQJ<br>♥ KT5<br>♦ A75432<br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If the defenders don't lead a heart, you can't create an entry to dummy in the suit. If you lead the ♥K, East can hold up winning the ♥A. When West leads a heart, however, you have the entry you need. If East doesn't take the ♥A, dummy's ♥8 will win and you have your entry to dummy. Once East plays the ♥A and you unblock the ♥K, the defenders can no longer prevent you from establish an entry to dummy with the remaining ♥J-9.

If the defenders switch to diamonds after you hold up the ♥K, you will be able to establish the diamond suit if the defenders' diamonds are divided 3-2.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/09/30)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/09/28)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/09)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/03)

### By Date

Use the links below.