---
prev:
  text: '2024-10-31'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/10/31'

next:
  text: '2024-11-02'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/02'
---

# 2024-11-01

On this deal, there is an unexpected opportunity to defeat the contract. Can you take advantage?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q64<br>♥ Q2<br>♦ T7654<br>♣ KJ7</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South and neither side is vulnerable. East is the dealer and opens 2NT, showing a balanced hand with about 20-21 points. You have your first opportunity to make a call at the three level.

With a balanced hand and only 8 high-card points, you have nothing to think about.

Responder bids 3♣, the Stayman convention, asking whether opener has a four-card or longer major suit. Your partner, North, passes, and opener replies 3♥, showing four or more hearts. The auction is back to you.

You still have nothing to say.

Responder bids 3NT. Responder was presumably looking for a spade fit with the 3♣ bid. Partner and East both pass. Opener doesn't have four spades in addition to the four hearts. You have one more chance to make a call.

Naturally, you pass, and the auction is over. You are now on lead against East's 3NT contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

Since East has bid hearts and West has implied a four-card spade suit, you aren't leading either of those suits. You have high cards in clubs and the diamond suit is longer. The diamond suit is poor, but you entertain some hope of establishing winners in the suit through length if partner has some length in diamonds.

Although the guideline is fourth best from your longest and strongest suit, it is preferable to lead the top of nothing when you have no honors in the suit but you do have touching cards. Hopefully, partner will be able to tell that you aren't leading your fourth highest card in the suit and can draw the appropriate inference. So let's go with leading the ♦8.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♦8, and dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK72<br>♥ 3<br>♦ J2<br>♣ T96432</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q64<br>♥ Q2<br>♦ T7654<br>♣ KJ7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As you expected from the auction, dummy has a four-card spade suit. West would not have used the Stayman convention without interest in finding a major-suit fit.

Declarer plays the ♦J from dummy. Partner covers with the ♦Q, and declarer wins the ♦A. Declarer now leads a low spade. What are you playing to this trick?

There's no reason to do anything except play second hand low. That's also consistent with showing partner the count in spades, playing low-high to show an odd number. The trick is won with dummy's as partner follows with the ♠J. Next, the ♣2 is led from dummy. Partner follows with the ♣5 and declarer plays the ♣Q. You win the trick with the ♣K. What are you leading to the next trick?

At this point, it looks tempting to continue with another diamond. With the ♠Q-6 remaining in your hand, it might look risky leading into dummy's ♠K-7-2. You want to avoid leading a heart since you know declarer started with four hearts. And holding the ♣J-7, it looks unattractive to lead a club, particularly if declarer holds the ♣A. It would only help declarer establish club winners.

So let's see what will happen if you simply lead another diamond. You continue with the ♦7. Partner plays the ♦9, and declarer takes the trick with the ♦10. Next, declarer plays the ♣A as partner shows out of clubs, discarding a low heart. Declarer leads the last club from declarer's hand. You win the ♣J but dummy's clubs have now become established winners.

It doesn't matter what you do next. Declarer claims the rest of the tricks with the ♠K, ♥A-K, ♦K, and dummy's three club winners. Your side took only two club tricks.

Was there something the defense could have done?

Let's go back to take another look.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♦8. Dummy's ♦J is played, covered by partner's ♦Q, and declarer wins with the ♦A. What's going on in diamonds?

It's hard to tell exactly at this point. Partner might just have the ♦Q, or may also have the ♦10 and even the ♦9. Can partner have the ♦K?

Unlikely. You have 8 high-card points, dummy also have 8 high-card points, and East has shown 20-21 with the 2NT opening. That's a total of 36 or 37 out of the 40 high-card points in the deck. That leaves only 3 or 4 for partner, and partner has already shown up with the ♦Q. Partner won't have more than a couple of jacks in the other suits.

East now leads a low spade. You play the ♠4, second hand low. Declarer rises with dummy's ♠A, and partner follows with the ♠J. What's the significance of partner's ♠J?

Partner is sending you two messages with one signal. Partner is presumably giving you a high-low count signal to show an even number of spades, two or four. Since declarer would have bid spades with a four-card suit after West used the Stayman convention, partner must have four and declarer only two. Partner could only afford to use the as a signal if partner also holds the ♠10, and likely the ♠9 as well. Otherwise, partner would have started high-low with a lower-ranking card. Playing an honor when it is not necessary shows the next lower-ranking card, in this case, the ♠10.

The ♣2 is now led from dummy, and partner plays the ♣5. When declarer plays the ♣Q, you win the trick with the ♣K. What is going on in the club suit?

Can partner hold the ♣A?

No. You have already determined that partner holds at most 1 or 2 high-card points. The only club missing other than declarer's presumed ♣A is the ♣8. Does partner hold the ♣8?

No. With an original holding of ♣8-5, partner would presumably have played the ♣8, starting a high-low count signal to show two clubs. So partner's ♣5 is a singleton and declarer still holds the ♣A-8. That's good. It looks as though you are eventually going to get a second club trick with your ♣J.

Since you've already worked out partner has four spades and a singleton club, you might as well consider how many hearts partner is likely to hold. How many?

Six. You have two hearts, and dummy has one. Declarer showed four hearts with the 3♥ response to Stayman. That leaves six for partner, unless declarer started with a five-card heart suit which would leave partner with only five.

You might as well finish off your detective work by determining partner's likely holding in diamonds. Assuming partner started with six hearts, how many diamonds did partner start with?

If partner has four spades, one club, and six hearts, that leaves room for only two diamonds. You've already seen the ♦Q from partner and know partner doesn't have the ♦K. Partner has at best the singleton ♦10 remaining.

You have reached the critical point in the defense. Having done all this detective work, what are you playing next?

The ♠Q!

Why?

Playing a club away from the is obviously not a good idea since that will let declarer take all the rest of the club tricks.

What will happen if you play either a heart or a diamond?

Declarer will win and continue with the ♣A and another club to establish dummy's remaining clubs as winners while dummy still has the ♠K as an entry. That will give declarer more than enough tricks to make the contract.

So you must lead the ♠Q. It serves two purposes. First, it removes dummy's remaining entry before the clubs are established. Second, it establishes partner's remaining spades as winners. Remember partner's earlier play of the ♠J?

Declarer has to win with dummy's ♠K. Declarer started with only two spades and, if declarer doesn't win the ♠K now, declarer may never get a trick with it. Partner and declarer follow with low spades. Declarer now leads a low club to the ♣A, hoping that both outstanding clubs will fall. However, partner shows out, as you "knew" was going to happen, and you follow with a low club. You still have the ♣J remaining.

And declarer has two diamond tricks. But your side has the rest. 3NT is down one. Declarer got two spade tricks, two heart tricks, three diamond tricks, and only one club trick.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ JT93<br>♥ JT9754<br>♦ Q9<br>♣ 5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AK72<br>♥ 3<br>♦ J2<br>♣ T96432</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 85<br>♥ AK86<br>♦ AKT3<br>♣ AQ8</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q64<br>♥ Q2<br>♦ T7654<br>♣ KJ7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer was unlucky to go down when the club finesse lost, the ♣J did not fall, and you found the excellent defense of removing dummy's remaining entry.

However, declarer could have made the contract. Declarer had to ignore trying the club finesse and simply play the ♣A at trick two, followed by the ♣Q while still having both high spades in dummy. You could win the ♣K and remove one of dummy's spades, but declarer only needed to give up a trick to your and would still have a spade entry to reach the established club winners. Declarer would get two spades, two hearts, three diamonds, and four club tricks, making two overtricks.

Declarer got greedy, using one of dummy's spade entries to try the club finesse. But it was then up to you to take advantage of the opportunity you were given.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/01)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/10/29)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/05)

### By Date

Use the links below.