---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-03'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/03'

next:
  text: '2024-11-05'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/05'
---

# 2024-11-04

In this column, can you reduce the potential danger?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQJT84<br>♥ AK5<br>♦ 6<br>♣ 972</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East and West are vulnerable and your side is not. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♦. East passes. You must select a response.

With 14 high-card points plus 2 length points for the six-card spade suit, there should be more than enough combined strength for at least game when partner has enough to open the bidding at the one level. The priority, however, is to first determine Where the partnership belongs. You start by responding at the one level in the six-card major suit.

West passes. North rebids 1NT, and East passes. You have an opportunity to make a second call.

Partner has shown a minimum-strength balanced hand of about 12-14 points. Since partner should have at least two spades, you've now found an eight-card or longer major-suit fit. With the answers to both How High and Where, you can take the partnership to game in 4♠.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are the declarer in 4♠ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦10. Dummy comes down with a balanced hand and 12 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K5<br>♥ 976<br>♦ AK975<br>♣ Q86</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJT84<br>♥ AK5<br>♦ 6<br>♣ 972</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In 4♠, you can afford to lose only three tricks. In a suit contract, begin by counting the potential losers. There are no spade losers since you have the top five cards in the suit between the combined hands. There will be a heart loser remaining after the ♥A and ♥K are gone. There are three potential club losers. There are no diamond losers since dummy's ♦A will take care of the singleton diamond in your hand. That's a total of four potential losers: one heart and three clubs. You can afford only three losers so one loser will need to be eliminated to make the contract.

There is nothing which can be done to avoid the heart loser within the heart suit itself.

A club loser might be avoided by leading twice toward dummy's hoping West holds both the ♣A and ♣K. That's only a 25% chance and it is even less likely since West has chosen to lead a diamond. West would likely lead a club if holding a suit headed by the ♣A-K.

West has led a diamond and there is an extra diamond winner in dummy.

So that can be used to discard the heart loser or one of the club losers.

In Considering the Order, West's diamond lead removes the diamond entry to dummy. Since the ♠K is the only other entry to dummy, declarer can't afford to draw all the defenders' trumps before taking the extra diamond winner. Will that be a problem?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦10. You win the first trick with dummy's ♦K as East follows with a low diamond. Since you can't afford to draw all the defenders trumps before taking the second diamond winner, suppose you decide to play the ♦A now. East follows with another low diamond and you discard the low heart loser. Bad news! West ruffs this trick with a low spade.

West leads a low heart and you win East's ♥J with the ♥K. You might as well draw trumps now. You start with a low spade to dummy's ♠K, high card from the short side first. Both defenders follow with low spades. When you play a second round of spades to the East follows but West shows out, discarding a heart. East still has one spade remaining, so you draw it with the ♠Q. The only hope now is to get a club trick with the help of a repeated finesse. When you lead a low club to dummy's ♣Q, East wins the ♣A. So much for that remote chance.

East leads a diamond, and you ruff. The only chance now is that the defenders will mistakenly discard too many clubs. You take a spade winner and West discards a club. That looks somewhat hopeful. You lead a club and West wins the ♣10.

Unfortunately, West takes a trick with the ♣K. That's the fourth trick for the defense.

You have the last two tricks, but the contract is down one. You lost a spade and three club tricks.

It was unfortunate West started with only a singleton diamond.

Could you have made the contract anyway?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♦10 and you win the first trick with the ♦K as East follows with a low diamond. West's lead has removed the entry to dummy in the diamond suit.

It is also a warning sign.

West chose to lead a diamond even though North opened the bidding 1♦.
Also, dummy holds the ♦9. It looks as though West has led a singleton diamond, hoping to get a ruff. Unfortunately, you can't afford to draw all the defenders' trumps before taking the remaining diamond winner to discard one of your losers. The opponents have five spades, so it would take at least three rounds and you would end up in your hand. Is there anything you can do?

You can afford to draw two rounds of trumps before taking the diamond winner.

You can still end up in dummy. That will prevent West from ruffing the diamond winner if West started with only two trumps. You'll also be okay if West started with a doubleton diamond.

At trick two you play a low spade to the ♠A. That draws two of the defenders' five trumps. You then play a low spade to dummy's ♠K. That draws two more of the defenders' trumps. There is only one trump outstanding. In dummy for the last time, you play the ♦A and discard the heart loser. You are hoping West either started with a doubleton diamond or has no spades remaining. The second chance comes through when West shows out of diamonds but doesn't have a spade with which to ruff.

West discards a heart. You now cross to your hand safely by leading a diamond and ruffing with a high spade. You draw the defenders' last trump, which you know is with East. You can try for an overtrick by leading toward dummy's ♣Q but East wins the ♣A.

East plays another diamond and you ruff. You can take the two heart winners.

You still have to lose two more club tricks, but you make the contract. You lost three club tricks, but that's all.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K5<br>♥ 976<br>♦ AK975<br>♣ Q86</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 93<br>♥ QT8432<br>♦ T<br>♣ KT54</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 762<br>♥ J<br>♦ QJ8432<br>♣ AJ3</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQJT84<br>♥ AK5<br>♦ 6<br>♣ 972</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As declarer, you want to draw the defenders' trumps whenever possible so they can't ruff any of your winners.

On this deal, West is in a position to ruff a second round of diamonds and East is in position to ruff a second round of hearts. However, you may have to delay drawing trumps when you have other priorities.

On this deal, you can't afford to draw all the defenders' trumps since you will then have no entry to dummy's second diamond winner. However, you can afford to partially draw trumps, to protect your winner as much as possible.

On this deal, you are unlucky to find West with only a singleton diamond, but you are lucky to find West with only two trumps.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/04)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/02)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/07)

### By Date

Use the links below.