---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-04'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/04'

next: false
---

# 2024-11-05

In today's deal, where is your possible setting trick?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T983<br>♥ <br>♦ AK643<br>♣ 8642</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South, and both sides are vulnerable. East is the dealer and opens 1♥. You have to decide what call to make.

You have only 7 high-card points but, when contemplating a possible takeout double, you can add 5 dummy points for the heart void. Still, that's not quite enough for a double, especially when vulnerable. Your diamond suit is okay, but it's not good enough to overcall at the two level. So let's go with pass.

West responds 1♠. Partner passes, and East makes a jump rebid to 4♥. East is showing a maximum-strength opening bid with a good six-card or longer heart suit. You have another chance to bid.

You have no reason to get involved in the auction.

West now bids 4NT, the Blackwood convention. Partner passes, and East replies 5♠. The opponents are playing standard Blackwood, so East's reply shows three aces. If they were playing key-card Blackwood, East would make the response to show three keycards. The auction is back to you.

Again, you have nothing to do except pass and wait to see where the opponents will wind up.

West bids 6♥, and partner and East both pass. You have one last chance to make a call.

Although you have an ace-king on opening lead, it's doubtful the opponents would have bid like this missing the first two diamond tricks. So you have no reason to do anything other than pass. You now have to choose an opening lead against East's 6♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>5♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>6♥</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

With the ace-king in an unbid suit, there is rarely any reason not to lead the suit against a slam contract. Every so often, the opponents have made a mistake and you can take the first two tricks before they have a chance to discard any losers in the suit. Besides, as long as it isn't ruffed, you will get to see the dummy before deciding what to do at trick two.

## Possible Defense

Some partnerships have specific agreements about what to lead from a suit headed by the ace-king against a high-level contract by the opponents. However, let's assume you make the standard lead of the ♦A. The dummy comes down.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ754<br>♥ K9<br>♦ 8<br>♣ KQT75</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T983<br>♥ <br>♦ AK643<br>♣ 8642</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

As you might have expected, West holds a singleton diamond to have committed the partnership to slam missing the ♦A-K. You aren't going to be able to take two diamond tricks against the slam. Dummy's singleton ♦8 is played, partner plays the ♦7, and declarer follows with the ♦10. You've won the first trick. But you are now faced with a critical decision. What are you playing to trick two?

Nothing seems particularly attractive. It's possible, perhaps, that the opponents have had a misunderstanding and partner holds one of the missing aces. It won't matter if it's the ♥A. That's not going away anywhere. But what if partner has either the ♠A or ♣A?

If partner holds ♠A the you need to lead a spade right now, before declarer has an opportunity to discard any spades on clubs. Similarly, if partner holds the ♣A you want to lead a club right now before declarer can discard any club losers on dummy's extra spade winners. What is it to be? Did partner provide any help with the play to the first trick?

Partner played the ♦7 to the first trick. Does that have any significance?

When dummy hits with a singleton in a suit contract after you lead an ace, partner will typically give you a suit preference signal to help you decide what to do next. As with all standard suit preference signals, a high card suggests a shift to the higher-ranking of the two "obvious" suits. A low card suggests a shift to the lower-ranking of the "obvious" suits. In this case, the higher-ranking of the "obvious" suits is spades; the lower-ranking is clubs. You typically eliminate the trump suit as one of the "obvious" suits. So what is the ♦7? Is partner asking you to shift to spades or clubs?

You can't see the ♦5 or ♦2, but partner is likely to hold at least one of them. So it looks as though the ♦7 isn't partner's lowest diamond. Partner doesn't appear to be asking for a club shift. So the ♦7 might look like a request to shift to spades. Typically, sevens and higher are encouraging cards when giving an attitude signal.

Let's see what will happen if you shift to a spade at trick two. You lead a spade at trick two, but declarer plays a low spade from dummy, partner plays low, and declarer wins the ♠A. Looks like that wasn't the thing to do.

Declarer starts drawing trumps by leading a heart to dummy's ♥K as you show out. Apparently, partner doesn't have the ♥A. Declarer leads another heart and wins the ♥10. Declarer plays another high heart, drawing partner's last trump. Declarer now claims the rest of the tricks.

Looking at the remaining cards, partner didn't hold either the ♠A or ♣A. So it doesn't look as though it matters what you shifted to at trick two.

But let's go back and try again.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♦A and examine the cards played to the first trick. You need to look carefully at partner's ♦7 to interpret what message it is sending.

Since there are a couple of lower-ranking diamonds missing, you can correctly infer that partner isn't asking for a club switch. However, there are also some higher-ranking diamonds missing, the ♦Q, ♦J, and ♦9. Although it's possible that declarer holds all the higher-ranking diamonds, it's unlikely. With a long heart suit, it's unlikely declarer started with four or more diamonds. So partner actually appears to be playing a middle-ranking diamond. What does that mean?

When you lead an ace against a suit contract and a singleton comes down in dummy, partner has a way of showing no preference for either the higher-ranking or lower-ranking suit. Partner does that by playing a middle-ranking card. It basically sends the message, "I don't have anything attractive in either spades or clubs... or they are both equally attractive." It leaves the opening leader to decide what to do next. Sometimes, the opening leader will have a holding suitable for a switch to another suit without any help from partner. In most common situations, however, the "no preference" signal tells the opening leader to either continue the suit or to perhaps switch to a trump to cut down on declarer's ability to ruff losers in the suit.

It makes sense from the auction that partner doesn't want either a spade or club shift. East showed three aces in response to the Blackwood convention and, looking at dummy, they must be the ♥A, ♠A, and ♣A. Your side isn't going to get any tricks from spades or clubs.

Should you consider shifting to a trump - assuming you had one to lead?

Probably not in this situation. Declarer has enough spade and club winners to discard any diamond losers after drawing trumps. So you would just be helping declarer draw trumps.

Therefore, it appears that both the logic of the situation and partner's middle-ranking signal suggest you continue with another diamond, even though you can see that declarer will be able to ruff in dummy.

Should you continue with the ♦K or a low diamond?

It won't matter if partner holds the ♦Q, but you might as well continue with the ♦K, forcing declarer to ruff in dummy.

Let's see why this will help on the actual deal. You continue with the ♦K, and declarer ruffs in dummy with the ♥9. Partner follows with a low diamond and declarer with the ♦Q. That tends to confirm your suspicion that the ♦7 was a middle-ranking diamond from partner.

Declarer continues with dummy's ♥K. Partner and declarer follow with low hearts. Declarer looks a little frustrated, however, when you show out.

Here are the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J62<br>♥ Q5<br>♦ J95<br>♣ 93</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ754<br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ KQT75</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ A<br>♥ AJT8764<br>♦ <br>♣ AJ</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T983<br>♥ <br>♦ 64<br>♣ 8642</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner started with three hearts, including the ♥Q. Once you remove dummy's ♥9 at trick two, declarer can no longer take a heart finesse when you show out on the first round of hearts.

Eventually, declarer will have to lose a trick to your partner's ♥Q. 6♥ is down one. Your side took one diamond and one heart. Only by continuing with a high diamond at trick two can you protect partner's vulnerable heart holding.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J62<br>♥ Q53<br>♦ J9752<br>♣ 93</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KQ754<br>♥ K9<br>♦ 8<br>♣ KQT75</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ A<br>♥ AJT87642<br>♦ QT<br>♣ AJ</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T983<br>♥ <br>♦ AK643<br>♣ 8642</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Although it is generally not a good idea to let declarer ruff losers in dummy, there are always exceptions. It may be necessary, as here, to create a heart winner for partner. It would be a similar situation if dummy had a doubleton ♥Q and partner had three hearts including the ♥K. By forcing dummy to ruff, declarer can no longer take repeated finesses against partner's ♥K.

There are other reasons for not shifting to a different suit after a singleton appears in dummy. It may be dangerous to shift to another suit but safe to continue the original suit. It may force declarer to ruff prematurely in dummy, removing an entry declarer was hoping to use later.

Would it have been okay to continue with a low diamond at trick two?

Possibly. If declarer thinks your partner holds the ♦K, declarer may ruff anyway in dummy, relying on the three missing hearts to divide favorably. But it does give declarer the opportunity of discarding from dummy and winning the ♦Q. Declarer can then still take a heart finesse after discovering the bad news.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/05)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/01)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/12)

### By Date

Use the links below.