---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-06'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/06'

next: false
---

# 2024-11-07

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQT<br>♥ Q62<br>♦ Q42<br>♣ AQ65</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Neither side is vulnerable. You have to choose an opening call in first position.

You have a balanced hand with 16 high-card points. That's right in the middle of the 15-17 point range for opening 1NT.

West passes, and partner, North, responds 2♣. East passes, and you have to choose a rebid.

Partner's 2* bid is the Stayman convention, asking whether you have a four-card or longer major suit. With no major suit, you make the artificial reply of 2♦.

West passes, and partner now jumps to 3NT. After East passes, you have another chance to make a call.

Partner's 3NT rebid is a signoff bid. You've described the hand by opening 1NT and then showing no major suit. Based on that, partner has chosen to play game in notrump. You have no reason to override partner's decision. You pass.

West passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠6. Partner puts down the dummy, and you have to find nine tricks to make the contract.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 2<br>♥ KJ53<br>♦ KT73<br>♣ KJT9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQT<br>♥ Q62<br>♦ Q42<br>♣ AQ65</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The first step in making a plan for a notrump contract is to count sure tricks. You start with one sure spade winner, the ♠A. However, West has led a spade, so you are guaranteed a second winner no matter what East plays to this trick. There are no sure heart tricks since the opponents hold the ♥A. There are four sure club tricks since you hold all the high clubs. There are no sure diamond tricks since the opponents hold the ♦A. That leaves a total of six sure winners, two spades and four clubs. You need to find three more tricks.

Unless East holds both the ♠K and ♠J, you aren't getting more than two tricks from spades. Since West has chosen to lead the suit, it's likely West has at least one of the spade honors, if not both.

You also aren't getting more than four tricks from clubs. So the three extra winners will need to come from hearts and diamonds.

In hearts, you can promote two sure winners by driving out the ♥A. You will get a third winner through length if the six missing hearts are divided exactly 3-3. If West started with a singleton or doubleton ♥A, you can get three heart tricks by leading low toward dummy's ♥J and, if necessary, the ♥K.

In diamonds, you can promote a winner by driving out the ♦A. You might be able to get a second winner if West holds the ♦J by taking a finesse of the ♦10. And you might get a third trick if the defenders' diamonds are divided 3-3.

So, you can promote the winners you need from hearts and diamonds, and either suit alone might provide all three winners you need. Is there any danger?

West has led a spade. Although you have two sure spade stoppers, there is a danger that West might be able to establish enough spade winners to defeat the contract before you have developed the three extra tricks you need. Let's see what might go wrong.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠6. You play the singleton ♠2 from dummy, East plays the ♠J, and you win the ♠Q. You are now at a critical point in the play. What are you playing to trick two?

Since the heart suit might provide all three tricks you need, it seems reasonable to start with it.

Let's see what will happen on the actual deal. Suppose you start by leading a low heart toward dummy, in case West started with a singleton or doubleton ♥A. West plays a low heart, you play dummy's ♥J, and East wins the ♥A. No ♥A with West, but you have promoted two of the three tricks you need.

East returns partner's suit, leading back a low spade. You try the ♠10 just in case East holds the ♠K. This loses to West's ♠K, as you probably anticipated. You discard a diamond from dummy since you won't need the diamonds if the hearts behave. West plays another spade. You discard another diamond from dummy and win the trick with the ♠A as East follows with a spade.

You can now test the hearts. You play the ♥Q, and both defenders follow suit. So far, so good. You lead a heart to dummy's ♥K, but this time West shows out, discarding a club. The defenders' hearts have divided 4-2. You aren't getting the third trick you need from hearts. You could simply take the club winners, but you still have a chance. You can try to establish a diamond winner and hope the defenders can't take enough tricks to defeat the contract. Perhaps East has the ♦A but no more spades.

Suppose you try leading a diamond. East hops up with the ♦A. You've established the diamond winner you need.

East has a heart winner to take. You'll still be okay if East has no spade left to lead.

However, East has a spade to lead and West has two spade winners to take. 3NT is down two.

Perhaps you should have taken the four club winners before leading a diamond, but you'd still be down one.

Let's go back and try again.

## Another Possible Play

West has led the ♠6, and you win the first trick with the ♠Q after East plays the ♠J. What next?

As you've seen, leading a heart from your hand won't work if East holds the ♥A and the hearts aren't divided 3-3. How about starting with a diamond instead?

Let's see. Suppose you lead the ♦Q at trick two. West plays a low diamond, you play a low diamond from dummy, and East wins the ♦A. East returns a spade, you try the ♠10, but it loses to West's ♠K. You discard a heart from dummy since you are now going to have to rely on the diamonds. West leads another spade. You discard another heart from dummy and win the trick with the ♠A.

You now need three tricks from the diamond suit, so you are going to have to hope West holds the ♦J and the defenders' diamonds are divided 3-3. You lead a diamond and, when West follows with a low diamond, you try dummy's ♦10. Unfortunately, this loses to East's ♦J.

You are in trouble now. You have already lost two diamonds and a spade. The defenders have two spade winners and the ♥A to take. 3NT is down two again.

It looks as though neither hearts nor diamonds will work on this deal.

Let's try once more.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠6. You win the first trick with the after East plays the ♠J.

Although it appears that trying to get the three tricks you need from neither hearts nor diamonds will work on this deal, the contract is actually 100% secure. Leading a heart from your hand won't work if East holds the ♥A and the hearts aren't divided 3-3. However, it would be fine if West holds the ♥A, even if the hearts don't divide 3-3. West can't continue leading spades without giving you another spade trick. And, if West doesn't lead another spade, you will have time to promote a ninth trick in diamonds. Does that give you any ideas?

How about starting by leading a low heart from dummy?

If East plays low, you can play the ♥Q. If West wins the ♥A, the contract will be safe as West is the safe opponent. And if East holds the ♥A, it won't do East any good to hop up with the ♥A to lead a spade. You will play a low heart from your hand and will now have three heart tricks with the ♥K, ♥Q, and ♥J.

So, at trick two, you cross to dummy with a club.

You lead a low heart from dummy.

East plays a low heart, you play the ♥Q, and it wins the trick as West follows with a low heart. West apparently doesn't have the ♥A, but at least you've got one of the extra tricks you need. You now have another critical decision. What are you playing to the next trick?

It won't do any good to lead another heart at this point. East will win the ♥A and return a spade. Again, you will be reliant on the defenders' hearts being originally divided 3-3.

What about leading a diamond from your hand?

That won't work either. East could win the ♦A and return a spade. You still won't have a ninth trick and you will be reliant on getting a second diamond winner.

What about leading a diamond from dummy?

If East plays low and the ♦Q loses to West's ♦A, you will be okay. West can't continue spades without establishing another spade trick for you and, if West doesn't play a spade, you can promote your ninth trick in hearts. And, if East has the ♦A and plays it, you will play low from your hand and have two diamond winners.

So you cross back to dummy with another club.

West follows, and East shows out, discarding a diamond.

You lead a low diamond from dummy.

If East plays the ♦A, you will have two diamond winners to go with the heart winner you already have. East plays low, however, and your ♦Q wins the trick. You now have two of the three extra tricks you need. What next?

Back to hearts!

It's safe now to promote the ninth trick you need in hearts. You no longer need the hearts to divide favorably. You lead a low heart to dummy's ♥J, and East wins the ♥A.

East returns a spade, but you have no need to try the spade finesse. You have the tricks you need. You win the ♠A. You lead a heart to dummy's ♥K. If both defenders had followed, you would have an overtrick. West shows out, however, but that's okay. You take an eighth trick with dummy's ♣K. The ♣A is your ninth trick.

The opponents have the rest of the tricks, but you've made the 3NT contract. You took two spades, four clubs, two hearts, and a diamond.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 2<br>♥ KJ53<br>♦ KT73<br>♣ KJT9</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K9863<br>♥ 74<br>♦ 85<br>♣ 8743</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J754<br>♥ AT98<br>♦ AJ96<br>♣ 2</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQT<br>♥ Q62<br>♦ Q42<br>♣ AQ65</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

On this deal, East is the dangerous opponent. If East gains the lead before you have the tricks you need, East can lead a spade, establishing enough spade tricks to defeat the contract. West is the safe opponent. If West wins a trick, West can't hurt you by leading another spade.

Leading toward your honors in hearts and diamonds - making the dangerous opponent play second to the trick - is an effective way of winning tricks without letting the dangerous opponent capture one of your honors until it's too late.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/07)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/04)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/07#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.