---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-07'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/07'

next: false
---

# 2024-11-08

On this deal, the opponents are off to a fast start. Can you still make your contract?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QJT83<br>♥ Q93<br>♦ KQ<br>♣ QT6</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South, and neither side is vulnerable. West is the dealer and opens with a preemptive bid of 3♥. Your partner, North, doubles, and East passes. You have to decide what call to make.

Partner's double is for takeout. The usual agreement is that doubles are for takeout through at least three-of-a-suit, and even higher if the partnership agrees. You have 12 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card spade suit. You might discount the ♥Q since it is in the opponent's suit, but you still have enough strength to go for game if partner is willing to compete at the three level. Partner likely has four cards in the unbid major, spades, so there should be an eight-card or longer major-suit fit. It's reasonable to jump to 4♠.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥A, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A975<br>♥ T74<br>♦ A93<br>♣ AK7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QJT83<br>♥ Q93<br>♦ KQ<br>♣ QT6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You now have to find a way to take the ten tricks needed to make the contract.

In planning the play in a suit contract, consider the number of losers you have. How many losers are there in the 4♠ contract?

There is a potential spade loser since you are missing the ♠K. There are no losers in the diamond or club suit. However, there are three potential heart losers. In fact, you are likely to lose three heart tricks right away since West has led the ♥A. Even if West continues with the ♥K, establishing your ♥Q as a winner, that's likely to be short-lived. West has shown a long heart suit with the preemptive 3♥ opening, so East will ruff a third round of hearts.

If you are going to lose three heart tricks, you need to avoid a spade loser. It looks as though you will need West to hold the ♠K so that you can trap it with the help of a finesse.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West leads the ♥A, you play a low heart from dummy, and East shows out, discarding a low diamond. You now know that West started with a seven-card heart suit headed by the ♥A-K-J. West wins the first trick. West continues with the ♥K, winning the second trick. East discards a low club. West now leads a third round of hearts and, as you feared, East ruffs this with a low spade. There goes your ♥Q. East returns a diamond, and you win the trick with the ♦Q.

There's no putting off the trump suit. You lead the ♠Q, and West follows suit with a low spade. You are at the critical point in the play. Which card are you playing from dummy?

Since you can't afford to lose any more tricks, it looks as though you should play a low spade from dummy, taking a finesse against the hoped-for ♠K in West's hand.

Unfortunately, East has the ♠K and wins the trick. East returns a club, which you can win with dummy's ♣K.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥A. On this trick, East shows out and discards a low diamond. West has started with a good seven-card heart suit. West continues with the ♥K, winning a second trick. West leads a third round of hearts and East ruffs the trick with a low spade. East returns a diamond and, finally, you're able to win a trick.

You start to draw the defenders' trumps by leading the hoping perhaps West will play the ♠K. West, however, plays the ♠2. Before you decide what to play in dummy, you need to consider whether it is likely that West holds the ♠K.

No!

Let's review the auction. West opened the bidding 3♥, showing a weak hand with a long suit. West has led the ♥A and followed with the ♥K. If West also held the ♠K, West would be more likely to open at the one level than the three level.

Backing your judgment, you take your only chance. You play dummy's ♠A, hoping East did not start with three spades with the ♠K. To your delight, East's ♠K falls on this trick.

You now have the rest of the tricks, making the 4♠ contract. You lost only the first three heart tricks, but that's all.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A975<br>♥ T74<br>♦ A93<br>♣ AK7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 62<br>♥ AKJ8652<br>♦ 84<br>♣ 93</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ K4<br>♥ <br>♦ JT7652<br>♣ J8542</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ QJT83<br>♥ Q93<br>♦ KQ<br>♣ QT6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

East started with a doubleton ♠K but had to use the low spade to ruff the third round of hearts. You were lucky that East did not hold three spades, but you wouldn't have made the contract if you hadn't done a little detective work by examining the clues from the auction.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/08)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/07)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/08#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.