---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-10'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/10'

next:
  text: '2024-11-12'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/12'
---

# 2024-11-11

In this deal, do you need any cards to be favorably placed?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A853<br>♥ A92<br>♦ AQ7<br>♣ K93</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South with both sides vulnerable. As the dealer, you have the first opportunity to open the bidding.

There are 17 high-card points and the hand is balanced. It falls at the top of the 15-17 range for an opening bid of 1NT.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 1NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠4. Dummy comes down with a balanced hand and 6 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K7<br>♥ Q75<br>♦ JT964<br>♣ 864</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A853<br>♥ A92<br>♦ AQ7<br>♣ K93</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You need seven tricks in 1NT. In a notrump contract, begin making a plan by counting the sure winners you have. You start with two spade winners, your and dummy's ♠K. There is one sure heart winner, your ♥A. There are no sure club winners since the defenders hold all the high clubs other than your ♣K. There is one sure diamond winner, your ♦A. That's a total of four sure winners: two spades, one heart, and one diamond. Three more winners are needed to make the 1NT contract.

You might get one extra heart winner with the help of a finesse by leading toward dummy's ♥Q, hoping West holds the ♥K. That's a 50% chance.

You might also get a club trick with the help of a finesse by leading a club from dummy, hoping East holds the ♣A. That's another 50% chance. The diamond suit offers the chance to establish two extra winners with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♦K. Even if the finesse loses, the remaining diamonds will be promoted into winners.

So it looks as though you can establish all the tricks you need with the help of some finesses.

Is that the only consideration?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠4. Since you would like to be in dummy to try the diamond finesse, suppose you win the first trick with dummy's ♠K. East follows with the ♠9 as you follow with a low spade. You are now in the right place to try the diamond finesse. You lead the ♦J from dummy and East follows with a low diamond. You play low and West follows with a low diamond. Success. The ♦J wins the trick. You can now repeat the finesse. You lead a low diamond from dummy and East again follows with a low diamond. You finesse the ♦Q and it wins the trick as West follows with a low diamond. The successful diamond finesse has allowed you to establish two extra winners in diamonds. You play the ♦A, dropping East's ♦K as West discards a low heart. With the ♦K gone, dummy's remaining two diamonds are also winners. and East will be forced to win the ♦A.

Unfortunately, there's no immediate entry to dummy's diamond winners. You can try to get there with the ♥Q. When you lead a low heart to dummy's ♥Q, however, East wins the ♥K. That finesse didn't work.

East leads the ♣Q. That gives you a chance to try the club finesse. When you play the ♣K, however, West wins the ♣A. That's another finesse that has lost. West takes a trick with the ♣10. West leads a spade and East plays the ♠J. You can win this trick with the ♠A.

You have the ♥A as a sixth trick.

Unfortunately, the defenders have the last four tricks and the contract is down one.

The diamond finesse won but the heart finesse and the club finesse both failed.

Could you have made the contract anyway?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠4. Before deciding where to win the first trick, you need to make a complete plan.

Although there are possible finesses available in hearts, clubs, and diamonds, you don't need any finesses to make the contract.

The diamond suit will provide three extra winners through promotion by simply driving out the ♦K.

Promotion is a sure thing.

However, you will need an entry to the established diamond winners and the only sure entry is the ♠K.

To preserve dummy's ♠K as an entry, you win the first trick with the ♠A.

You now start the diamond suit by playing the ♦A. Both defenders follow with low diamonds. You continue with the ♦Q. Again, both defenders follow with low diamonds. You can now lead your remaining low diamond to one of dummy's diamonds to drive out the ♦K. Even if a defender had started with four or more diamonds including the ♦K, you would be in the right hand to continue promoting the diamond suit.

East returns a spade and you can win this with dummy's carefully-preserved ♠K. You can now take both the promoted diamond winners. The ♥A is your seventh trick. You can lead toward the ♥Q to try for an overtrick, but East wins the ♥K. So much for that finesse.

East switches to the ♣Q. You try the ♣K, but this loses to West's ♣A. So much for that finesse. The defenders have the rest of the tricks, but you have made the contract. You took two spades, one heart, and four diamond tricks. Even though the heart and club finesses lost, it didn't matter.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K7<br>♥ Q75<br>♦ JT964<br>♣ 864</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT642<br>♥ T43<br>♦ 83<br>♣ AT5</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ J9<br>♥ KJ86<br>♦ K52<br>♣ QJ72</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A853<br>♥ A92<br>♦ AQ7<br>♣ K93</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Even though the finesse is a useful technique for declarer, it isn't a sure thing. Promotion, however, is a sure thing, provided you can afford to let the defenders gain the lead.

On this deal, promoting three winners in diamonds is all you need to make the contract. Even though the diamond finesse would actually work on this deal, you can't afford to try it. You don't have enough entries to dummy to both take the diamond finesse and then reach the diamond winners once they are created. Instead, you must keep the only sure entry to dummy until you are ready to use it... after the necessary diamond winners have been promoted.

All three possible finesses on this deal are only an illusion. You don't need any of them.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/11)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/09)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/11#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.