---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-11'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/11'

next: false
---

# 2024-11-12

In today's deal, it will require good defense from both you and partner to defeat the contract.

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q862<br>♥ Q96<br>♦ K82<br>♣ 962</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. With neither side vulnerable, East is the dealer and opens 1♣. You have to decide what call to make.

With only 7 high-card points and balanced distribution, there is nothing to think about. You pass.

West responds 1♦, and your partner, North, passes. Opener now jumps to 2NT, showing a balanced hand with about 18-19 points. The auction is back to you.

Naturally, you pass.

Responder raises to 3NT. Partner and East both pass. It's your turn again to make a call.

Your pass ends the auction, and you are now on lead against East's 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

There are two unbid suits, and you have no reason to choose anything except fourth best from your longest and strongest suit, spades.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♠2, and West puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J74<br>♥ 874<br>♦ AJT95<br>♣ 74</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q862<br>♥ Q96<br>♦ K82<br>♣ 962</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Dummy has 6 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. East's 2NT rebid was invitational. If West had been a tiny bit weaker, 2NT might have been the final contract.

While declarer is planning the play, you can figure out partner's approximate strength. Declarer has 18 or 19 points. Dummy has 6 high-card points, and you have 7. That's a total of 31 or 32, leaving partner with 8 or 9 points.

Declarer plays the ♠4 from dummy. Partner plays the ♠10. That wins the trick as declarer follows with the ♠5. Looks like you have got off to a good lead. Partner continues with the ♠K, winning the second trick as declarer plays the ♠9, and you and dummy follow with low cards. Partner leads another spade, and declarer plays the ♠A. Declarer has been holding up with the ♠A. Which card do you play to this trick?

Since you will have the only remaining spade after this trick, you can choose between the two remaining spades to give partner a message. If you play the higher spade, you show preference for the higher-ranking suit of the two "obvious" suits. If you play your lower spade, you are showing preference for the lower-ranking suit. With dummy having long, strong diamonds, that suit is excluded, so the "obvious" suits are hearts and clubs. You have the ♥Q but nothing in clubs. Your potential entry to your spade winner is in the higher-ranking suit, hearts. You can send a suit preference signal by playing the ♠Q rather than the ♠8.

Declarer now leads the ♦4. You are at the critical point in the defense. What are you playing to this trick?

The general guideline in situations like this is second hand low.

Let's see what will happen if you do play low, the ♦2. Declarer plays the ♦J from dummy, and this loses to partner's ♦Q. Following your suit preference signal, partner leads the ♥2. Declarer wins the ♥K. Which heart do you play to this trick?

When the opponents are winning the trick and your holding in the suit may be unclear to partner, you usually give an attitude signal. High-low would encourage partner to continue hearts on gaining the lead, while low-high would send the opposite message. Even though your earlier suit preference signal said you liked hearts, it doesn't hurt to confirm the message. So you can play an encouraging ♥9.

Declarer next leads another diamond. You again play second hand low. Declarer plays dummy's ♦10, and this wins the trick as partner follows with a low diamond. The ♦A is played from dummy, your ♦K falls on this trick, and declarer discards a heart. Declarer leads an established diamond winner from dummy. Partner discards a heart, while you and declarer throw clubs. The last diamond is played from dummy, and partner discards another heart. Both you and declarer discard clubs. Declarer now leads dummy's ♣4. Partner follows low, and declarer wins with the ♣Q. Declarer takes a trick with the ♣A. Your ♠8 isn't going to do you any good now, so you discard it and hold on to both your hearts. Declarer takes a trick with the ♥A. That's declarer's ninth trick.

Partner wins the last trick with the ♣K, but declarer has made the 3NT contract. Declarer got one spade trick, two hearts, two clubs, and four diamond tricks.

Could anything have been done to defeat the contract?

Yes! Let's go back and take another look.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♠2, and partner wins the trick with the ♠10 as dummy and declarer follow with low spades. Partner continues with the ♠K, winning a second trick as everyone follows suit. When partner leads another spade, declarer plays the ♠A, and you correctly play the ♠Q, showing preference for hearts, the higher of the two "obvious" suit. Declarer now leads a low diamond toward dummy.

Before automatically playing second hand low, you need to consider the likely layout of the diamond suit. If declarer holds the ♦Q, it won't matter what you play. Declarer is entitled to five diamond tricks with the help of a finesse. However, declarer would likely have led the ♦Q rather than a low diamond. So it appears declarer holds two or three low diamonds and partner holds the ♦Q.

If you play a low diamond, declarer will take a diamond finesse which will presumably lose to partner's ♦Q. On regaining the lead, however, declarer will repeat the diamond finesse. This time, the diamond finesse will win and, when your ♦K falls under the ♦A, declarer has four diamond tricks.

What can you do to prevent this?

You should play the ♦K!

This gives declarer only two losing choices when declarer started with a doubleton diamond. Declarer might hope you started with both the ♦K and ♦Q and allow your ♦K to win the trick. You can then take your established spade winner. Later, if declarer takes a diamond finesse, it will lose to your partner's ♦Q. With no outside entry to dummy, declarer may take no diamond tricks instead of four! And if declarer wins the ♦A, declarer can continue with the ♦J to drive out partner's ♦Q and establish dummy's remaining diamonds as winners. However, if declarer started with only two diamonds, declarer can't reach the winners.

Let's see what will happen on the actual deal. Declarer chooses to win dummy's ♦A. Partner follows with a low diamond. Declarer leads a club from dummy and plays the ♣Q when partner follows with a low club, winning the trick as you play a low club. Declarer continues with the ♣A as everyone follows with low clubs again. Declarer leads a third round of clubs which partner wins with the ♣K. Partner leads back a low heart, and declarer wins the ♥K. Declarer takes an established club winner as everyone discards diamonds. Declarer takes another club winner. You discard a diamond, and partner discards a heart. Next, declarer leads a diamond, and you have to choose a discard.

Although your spade is a winner, it is the last one left. It is more important to hold onto both your hearts. So you discard the spade.

Partner wins the trick with the ♦Q. Partner leads a heart, and declarer wins the ♥A.

Declarer has a heart left, and you win the final trick with the ♥Q. That's the fifth trick for the defense, and 3NT is down one. Your side got two spades, one club, one diamond, and one heart. Declarer got only one trick from the diamond suit.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT3<br>♥ J532<br>♦ Q63<br>♣ K83</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J74<br>♥ 874<br>♦ AJT95<br>♣ 74</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ A95<br>♥ AKT<br>♦ 74<br>♣ AQJT5</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q862<br>♥ Q96<br>♦ K82<br>♣ 962</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner defended well by playing the ♠10 to the first trick, rather than the ♠K, third hand high. Partner kept the ♠J trapped in dummy. If partner had played the ♠K to the first trick, declarer wins the ♠A and can later get an entry to dummy by leading toward dummy's ♠J.

The key play, however, is for you to play "second hand high" when declarer leads a diamond toward dummy's long suit and there is no outside entry to the suit. If your ♦K and partner's ♦Q were exchanged, you would also have to play second hand high.

As a defender, you not only want to establish tricks for your side, but also to prevent declarer from establishing tricks.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/12)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/05)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/12#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.