---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-13'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/13'

next:
  text: '2024-11-15'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/15'
---

# 2024-11-14

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A7<br>♥ J8732<br>♦ K832<br>♣ A5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. You are the dealer and have to decide what call to make with this hand in first position.

You have 12 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. That's enough to open at the one level. Although it's not a very good suit, you still start with the five-card major.

West passes. Partner, North, passes, raises to 2♥. East now makes a takeout double, and you must decide what to do after this start.

You have already shown an opening bid, and you don't have either extra distribution or extra strength. No reason to compete any higher at this point. You pass.

West advances to 2♠. Partner and East both pass. The auction is back to you once more.

You would like to push the opponents higher by competing to the three level, but your hand is unsuitable, especially when vulnerable. Partner has chosen to pass and defend, so you have nothing more to say.

Your pass ends the auction. Partner will be making the opening lead against West's 2♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>X</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

There are two unbid suits, and you have no reason to choose anything except fourth best from your longest and strongest suit, spades.

## Possible Defense

Partner leads the ♦A. East puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KJT3<br>♥ AK<br>♦ QT76<br>♣ QT9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A7<br>♥ J8732<br>♦ K832<br>♣ A5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

A low diamond is played from dummy. You have your first decision. What are you playing to this trick?

The ♦A is an unusual lead since you are looking at the ♦K. Also, the partnership bid and raised hearts. So it looks as though the ♦A must be either a singleton or a doubleton. Partner is hoping to get one or more diamond ruffs.

Holding the ♦K, you might as well make an encouraging attitude signal with the ♦8. It looks as though partner may have got off to a good lead. If the ♦A is a singleton, partner will know you don't have an entry in hearts. Declarer follows with a low diamond.

Encouraged by your signal, partner continues with the ♦4. Another low diamond is played from dummy as you win the ♦K and declarer follows with a low diamond. You are now at the critical point in the defense. What are you playing next?

Partner is looking to ruff a diamond, and you know declarer still has a diamond remaining. So this looks like a good time to lead a third round of diamonds.

Let's see what will happen if you do. You lead the ♦2, declarer follows with the ♦J. As you expected, partner ruffs with the ♠4. Your side has the first three tricks, and you still have two aces!

Partner leads the ♣8. Looking at dummy, partner can see that the defense has no tricks coming from hearts. The lead of the ♣8 appears to be the top of nothing. Partner likely has no honor in clubs but is hoping you have something useful. Dummy's ♣9 is played, and you win the ♣A as declarer follows with a low club. What now?

Even though declarer is out of diamonds, it seems best to lead another round of diamonds. Perhaps partner can overruff declarer, or perhaps you will promote a spade winner for partner. Declarer, however, ruffs with the ♠8 and partner can't overruff. At least, you prevented declarer from making use of dummy's ♦Q.

Declarer now leads the ♠Q. Partner follows with the ♠2, a low spade is played from dummy, and you win the ♠A. There's nothing you can do at this point but lead a club, hoping partner either holds the ♣K or is out of clubs. Unfortunately, partner follows with a low club, and dummy's ♣10 wins the trick.

Declarer draws the remaining trumps with dummy's ♠K, and then has the rest of the tricks.

It seems as though partner found a good lead to hold declarer to eight tricks.

Or could the defense have done even better?

Let's see.

## Recommended Defense

Partner leads the ♦A, and you make an encouraging attitude signal with the ♦8. Partner continues with the ♦4, and you win the ♦K. Before automatically giving partner a diamond ruff, you need to consider how you might defeat the contract.

The ♦A-K and a diamond ruff will be three tricks for the defense. Your ♠A and ♣A will be two more. Where can a sixth trick come from?

It's possible partner has the ♣K, in which case you will get a second club trick. If that's the case, there won't be any problem. But what if partner doesn't hold the ♣K? Is there any other possibility?

Yes!

You have only a doubleton club, perhaps you can get a club ruff.

Will that be possible if you give partner a diamond ruff right away?

No!

After two rounds of clubs have been played, you will need an entry to partner's hand so partner can lead a third round of clubs. Unless partner has the ♣K, partner's only remaining entry will be the diamond ruff. What can do you do about it?

Lead clubs right now!

Holding the ♣A, you know you will regain the lead before declarer can draw all the defenders' trumps. You play the ♣A and partner follows with a low club. It doesn't look as though partner has the ♣K. What next?

Despite partner's discouraging attitude signal in clubs, you continue with your remaining club. Partner is a little disappointed not to get a diamond ruff right away, but you have bigger things in mind. Declarer wins the trick with dummy's ♣10.

Declarer leads a low spade from dummy. What are you playing to this trick?

The ♠A! You want to keep your low spade to ruff a club. You also want to make sure partner doesn't run out of spades. Declarer and partner follow with low spades. Now what?

It's time to give partner the diamond ruff. You lead the ♦2 to make it as clear as possible that you want partner to lead a club next. Declarer follows with the ♦J and, as you anticipated, partner ruffs. With everything you've done so far, partner has no problem leading a club. The ♣Q is played from dummy and you ruff with your remaining spade. When declarer follows with a club, you have the sixth trick for the defense.

You try another diamond, but declarer can ruff high, draw partner's remaining trump, and take the remaining tricks. However, you have defeated the 2♠ contract with two diamonds, the ♠A, the ♣A, a diamond ruff, and a club ruff.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 642<br>♥ T954<br>♦ A4<br>♣ 8642</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q985<br>♥ Q6<br>♦ J95<br>♣ KJ73</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KJT3<br>♥ AK<br>♦ QT76<br>♣ QT9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A7<br>♥ J8732<br>♦ K832<br>♣ A5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With four-card heart support, partner might have competed to the three level, and you would actually make nine tricks. However, partner would have to be pretty brave to bid 3♥, vulnerable, with such a weak hand.

Partner, however, found a great opening lead. If partner had led a heart, declarer would have no difficulty making the contract, even if the defense subsequently found the diamond ruff. However, it was up to you to continue this fine defense by arranging your own ruff.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/14)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/12)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/14#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.