---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-14'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/14'

next:
  text: '2024-11-16'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/16'
---

# 2024-11-15

On this deal, you will need to carefully plan your play.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ KT9<br>♥ Q63<br>♦ AQT4<br>♣ AKQ</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. Partner, North, is the dealer and passes. East also passes. You have to decide what call to make in third position.

You have a balanced hand and 20 high-card points. That falls right into the range for a 20-21 point 2NT opening. The 2NT opening bid shows the same type of hand at any position at the table.

West passes. Partner raises to 3NT. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Partner has decided the partnership belongs in game in notrump and isn't interested in investigating any other contracts. Having already described your hand, there is no reason to bid again. West passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠4, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q65<br>♥ J74<br>♦ J952<br>♣ J97</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT9<br>♥ Q63<br>♦ AQT4<br>♣ AKQ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You must now find a way to take nine tricks.

In planning the play in a notrump contract, you start by counting the number of sure tricks you have. How many do you have?

You don't start with any sure spade tricks. West's opening lead, however, guarantees that you can count on getting two spade tricks no matter what East plays to the first trick. If East plays the ♠A, you will have two immediate winners. If East plays the ♠J or a low spade, you can win and then promote a second winner. You don't start with any sure tricks in hearts. The opponents have both the ♥A and ♥K, as well as the ♥10 and ♥9. Despite holding the four top club honors, there are only three winners. Finally, there is only one immediate sure trick in diamonds, the ♦A. Assuming you are going to get two spade tricks, that's a total of only six winners. You are going to need to establish three more winners.

You aren't getting any more tricks from spades or clubs than the five you are counting on.

The heart suit is likely to be a frozen suit. Assuming the ♥A and ♥K are split between the defenders, you will only be able to get a trick if the opponents choose to lead the suit.

So it appears you will have to get all three additional winners from the diamond suit. That should be possible with the help of a finesse if East holds the ♦K. That makes declarer's basic plan fairly straightforward. You are going to have to rely on East holding the ♦K.

Are there any potential problems?

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠4. You play a low spade from dummy, and East plays the ♠7. You are immediately at a critical point in the play. What are you playing to the first trick?

It seems automatic to win the first trick with the ♠9 or ♠10. That guarantees you will get two spade tricks since you will still have both the ♠K and ♠Q.

Let's see what will happen if you do win the first trick cheaply. Suppose you win the first trick with the ♠9. What next?

You now need to get to dummy so that you can take the diamond finesse. It would be dangerous to lead a heart, hoping to get to dummy with the ♥J. That's unlikely to work and may open up the heart suit so the defenders can take four or more heart tricks. So it looks best to establish dummy's ♠Q as an entry. You need a second spade trick anyway.

Let's see what will happen if you do. Suppose you lead the ♠K at trick two. If the opponents win their ♠A, dummy's ♠Q will be the entry you need. Unfortunately, both defenders play low spades to this trick. So that doesn't work. Worse, the defenders' spades are now established as winners, and they will likely have enough tricks to defeat the contract no matter what you do next.

Perhaps you should have led a low spade instead of the ♠K.

Let's see.

## Another Possible Play

West leads the ♠4. Suppose you win the first trick with the ♠9.

At trick two, let's assume you lead the ♠10. If West has the ♠A and plays low, you can win the ♠Q and will have an entry you need. West, however, hops up with the ♠A. West isn't going to allow you to sneak through an entry to dummy.

West leads another spade, and you have to win with the ♠K. You are back in your hand again and facing the same problem. The defenders' spades are now established as winners and you can't reach the dummy.

So let's return to the first trick and consider the clues available that might help.

## One More Possible Play

West leads the ♠4. Before even playing from dummy to this trick, you want to gather any clues available. hat do you know at this point?

With nothing to guide West from the auction, West is presumably leading fourth best from West's longest and strongest suit, spades. If that's the case, you can apply the Rule of Eleven. Subtracting West's 4 from 11 leaves 7 cards higher than the ♠4 in the other three hands. There are three higher cards in dummy, the ♠6, and ♠5. You have three cards higher than the ♠4 in your hand, the ♠K, ♠10, and ♠9.

That means East has only one card higher than the ♠4!

Should you play dummy's ♠Q to this trick, hoping East's higher card isn't the ♠A?

No. First, it would be dangerous if East's higher card happens to be the ♠A. Not only would the not provide an entry, East would then return a spade and you would get only one spade trick. Second, there is no need to play the ♠Q at this point. If West holds the ♠A, you can still use the ♠Q as an entry while making sure you get the two spade tricks that you need.

You play a low spade from dummy and East plays the ♠7. What information do you have now?

East's ♠7 must be the only card East has that is higher-ranking than the ♠4.

So East has no cards remaining higher than the ♠4!

How does this information affect your play to the first trick?

You should win this trick with the ♠K!

That will guarantee that you will be able to use the as an entry.

You can't take the diamond finesse until you can get to dummy, so you might as well focus on getting there. At trick two, you lead the ♠10 and West follows with the ♠2. Now what?

West has surprised you a little by playing low on this trick, but that shouldn't distract your plan. You don't want to play low and be left in your hand, so you play dummy's ♠Q. As your detective work indicated, dummy's wins this trick. East doesn't have the ♠A.

Now that you have successfully reached dummy, it's time to use your entry to go to work on your diamond suit. You have another important decision to make. Does it matter which diamond you lead from dummy?

Since you want to be able to repeat the finesse if East does hold the ♦K, it may seem like a good idea to start with the ♦J. If East covers with the ♦K, you will have four diamond winners. If East doesn't cover with the ♦K, you will still be in dummy and can repeat the finesse.

However, let's see the problem with that on this deal. Suppose you lead the ♦J from dummy, East plays low, you play low, and West follows with a low diamond. Success! East holds the ♦K, which is what you need to make the contract. You continue with another diamond. East plays low again, and you repeat the finesse. The finesse wins again, but West shows out. That's not good. East still has two diamonds left, including the ♦K, but you can't repeat the finesse again since you are in your hand and there are no more entries to dummy.

Since you can't repeat the finesse, you are going to have to settle for eight tricks. You have two spade tricks and two diamond tricks. You will take one more diamond trick and three club winners, but that's all. 3NT will be down one. That's too bad since you managed to create an entry to dummy and East did hold the ♦K.

Let's go back once more time.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♠4, and you correctly play the ♠K to guarantee that you will have an entry to dummy with the ♠Q. At trick two, you play the ♠10. When West plays low, you rise with dummy's ♠Q.

You go to work on the diamond suit. You want to take the diamond finesse, but you may need to repeat the finesse two more times if East holds four or more diamonds. Is there a way to do that?

You must start with the ♦9.

Let's see how that allows you to guard against East holding four or more diamonds. East plays a low diamond, and you play a low diamond. The first finesse works, and you are still in dummy. Next, you continue with the ♦J. East plays low again, and you can underplay the ♦J with the ♦10. West shows out, but that's okay. You are still in dummy. You can now repeat the finesse for a third time. That accomplishes what you needed to do, get all four tricks from the diamond suit. The ♦A drops East's pesky ♦K. You can take the club winners and you have the first nine tricks.

The defense has the rest, but you've taken two spade tricks, three club tricks, and four diamond tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q65<br>♥ J74<br>♦ J952<br>♣ J97</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ842<br>♥ A82<br>♦ 3<br>♣ 8632</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ 73<br>♥ KT95<br>♦ K876<br>♣ T54</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ KT9<br>♥ Q63<br>♦ AQT4<br>♣ AKQ</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The key to making this contract is to make your plan and gather any available clues before playing to the first trick. That tells you that you are going to need all four tricks from the diamond suit plus an entry to dummy so that you can finesse in diamonds.

Applying the Rule of Eleven lets you know that East has only one spade higher than the ♠4. The play to the first trick tells you which higher spade East holds, confirming the layout of the spade suit and letting you get the ♠K out of the way to create an entry with dummy's ♠Q while still ensuring the two spade winners that are needed.

Then it's time to tackle the diamond suit, and this requires some care to make sure you get all four tricks when East holds the ♦K, no matter how many diamonds East holds.

Unless you are already familiar with a particular suit combination, such as the diamonds on this deal, it is best to carefully walk through the order in which you want to play it to get the tricks you need. Hopefully, that will lead you to start with the ♦9. If not, by studying the combination, you will hopefully recognize it the next time it comes up.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/15)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/11)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/16)

### By Date

Use the links below.