---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-17'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/17'

next:
  text: '2024-11-19'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/19'
---

# 2024-11-18

In this column, how should you handle the key suit?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ J73<br>♥ KJT85<br>♦ A8<br>♣ KQ2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

East and West are vulnerable and your side is not. Partner, North, is the dealer and opens the bidding 1♣. East passes. You must select a response.

With 14 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit, there should be enough combined strength for at least game when partner has enough to open the bidding at the one level. The priority, however, is to first determine Where the partnership belongs. You start by responding at the one level in the five-card major suit.

West passes. North raises to 2♥, and East passes. You have an opportunity to make a second call.

Partner's raise shows at least three-card support for hearts and a minimum- strength opening bid of about 12-16 points. You've now found an eight-card or longer major-suit fit. With the answers to both How High and Where, you can take the partnership to game in 4♥.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦J.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q654<br>♥ AQ93<br>♦ Q5<br>♣ AT7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J73<br>♥ KJT85<br>♦ A8<br>♣ KQ2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In 4♥, you can afford to lose only three tricks. In a suit contract, begin by counting the potential losers. There are no heart loser since you hold all the combined high cards in the suit. There are three potential spade losers since the opponents hold the ♠A and ♠K as well as the ♠10 and ♠9. There is a diamond loser since the opponents hold both the ♦K and ♦J. There are no club losers since you hold the ♣A-K-Q between the combined hands. That's a total of four potential losers: three spades and one diamond. Since you can afford only three losers, one loser will need to be eliminated to make the contract.

You might avoid a spade loser if either opponent started with a singleton or doubleton ♠A or ♠K, or with both ♠A the and ♠K. If West started with a doubleton ♠A, for example, you could lead a low spade to dummy's to drive out East's ♠K and then play a low spade from both hands to drive out West's ♠A.

In diamonds, you might hope to discard a diamond on a spade winner if the defenders' spades divide 3-3 and a spade can be established in time. However, West has led a diamond. The only realistic chance to avoid a diamond loser is to hope West has led from a holding that includes the ♦K.

So you have a slight chance to avoid the diamond loser. Otherwise, you will have to decide how to avoid one of the spade losers. Let's see how the play might go.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦J. You try the ♦Q from dummy in case West has led away from the ♦K, but East produces the ♦K. No luck there. You win the ♦A.

No reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. You are missing four hearts. Both defenders follow when you play a low heart to dummy's ♥A. Both defenders also follow when a low heart is played to the ♥K. That takes care of all the defenders' trumps.

Suppose you decide to tackle the spade suit. Hoping West started with both spade honors or a singleton or doubleton ♠K or ♠Q, you lead a low spade to dummy's ♠Q. East wins the ♠K. So much for the hope West started with both high honors or a singleton honor.

West returns a diamond and the defenders take their diamond winner. That was expected. West leads a club and you choose to win with dummy's ♣A.

Back to spades. You lead a low spade from dummy and East follows with a low spade. You now have to decide whether East started with both the and ♠K or whether West is down to only the ♠A. You decide to play East to have started with both high honors and you play the ♠J. Unfortunately, West wins the ♠A.

West leads another club and you take the two remaining club winners. You can take the three remaining heart winners, hoping the defenders will discard all their spades. West discards one spade, but there is still a high spade outstanding. At least West didn't start with a doubleton so you didn't misguess in that suit.

East wins the last trick with the ♠10 and the contract is down one. You lost three spade tricks and a diamond trick.

The spade honors were divided between the defenders and the spades broke 3-3, so you couldn't get a spade trick when the opponents defended correctly. Could you still have made the contract?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♦J. You try the ♦Q from dummy, but East plays the ♦K. You win the ♦A. So much for any chance to avoid a diamond loser.

You don't want to have to play the spade suit yourself. It would be far better if the defenders were to lead a spade. Then you would be guaranteed a spade trick no matter how the defenders spades are divided.

Let's see how you can bring that about. To get the defenders to lead a spade, you need to remove any other options. You can start by removing the hearts from the defenders' hands. Both defenders follow when a heart is led to dummy's ♥A. That removes two of their trumps. When a heart is led from dummy to the ♥K, both defenders again follow suit. You have removed all the hearts from the defenders' hands. When they gain the lead, they won't be able to lead a heart.

You also want to take all your club winners so the defenders won't be able to lead a club on gaining the lead. Both the defenders follow when a club is played to the ♣A. Both defenders follow when a club is played to the ♣Q. Both defenders also follow when you take a trick with the ♣K. One of the defenders still has a club remaining, but that's okay. Since you don't have any clubs remaining in either hand, if a defender leads a club after gaining the lead, you will be able to ruff in the dummy and discard a spade loser from your hand.

It's time to put the defenders on lead so they have to play spades for you. You can exit with your diamond loser. This accomplishes two things. You put the defenders on lead and remove all the diamonds from your combined hands.

Let's look at the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q654<br>♥ Q9<br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A92<br>♥ <br>♦ T64<br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KT8<br>♥ <br>♦ 73<br>♣ 9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J73<br>♥ JT8<br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

West is on lead, having won the diamond trick. West has no hearts or clubs to lead. West still has diamonds to lead but, if West leads a diamond, you will be able to ruff in dummy and discard - sluff - a spade loser from your hand. A ruff and a sluff.

West's only option is to lead a spade. West leads the ♠A, hoping East holds both the ♠K and ♠J. Once West leads a spade, your contract becomes secure. West continues with another spade and East wins the ♠K. Your spades have now been established as winners. East has a club to lead but, as with the diamonds, it won't do any good since you can ruff in either hand. East leads a spade, and you win.

You have the rest of the tricks with the remaining heart winners. You've made the contract, losing only one diamond trick and two spade tricks. You gave the defenders no option but to lead spades for you.

## Summary

Here is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q654<br>♥ AQ93<br>♦ Q5<br>♣ AT7</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A92<br>♥ 72<br>♦ JT964<br>♣ J85</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KT8<br>♥ 64<br>♦ K732<br>♣ 9643</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J73<br>♥ KJT85<br>♦ A8<br>♣ KQ2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

The spade suit in this deal is referred to as a frozen suit. Whichever side leads it, loses a trick. If you lead it and the opponents defend correctly, they get three tricks. If you lead a low spade, for example, the next defender plays second hand low. If you lead a spade honor, the next defender covers an honor with an honor. If you were left to play the suit yourself, you would have to hope the opponents misdefend or you find a fortunate lie of the missing spade honors.

Since you want the opponents to lead the spade suit, you want to put them in the position where they have no other option. You accomplish that on this deal with the help of an end play. You first eliminate their other options by removing their hearts and eliminating the clubs and the diamonds in your combined hands. When you put them on lead with their diamond winner, they are left having to break the spade suit for you.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/18)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/16)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/21)

### By Date

Use the links below.