---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-18'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/18'

next: false
---

# 2024-11-19

In today's deal, will your side be able to get to your winners?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ K74<br>♥ 93<br>♦ KT854<br>♣ 642</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. West is the dealer and opens 1♣. Your partner, North, passes, and East responds 1♥. You have your first opportunity to make a call.

You have 6 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card diamond suit. You don't have nearly enough for an overcall at the two level. You pass.

West rebids 2♣. Partner passes, and East jumps to 3NT. The auction is back to you.

Naturally, you pass.

West and partner also pass, and the auction is over. You now have to choose an opening lead against East's 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♣</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The Opening Lead

The guideline is to lead fourth highest from your longest and strongest suit, and there's no reason to do anything else after this auction. From this hand, that means leading the ♦5. Let's see how that works out.

## Possible Defense

You lead the ♦5, and West puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q86<br>♥ K75<br>♦ 6<br>♣ AQJ873</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K74<br>♥ 93<br>♦ KT854<br>♣ 642</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Looking at the singleton diamond in dummy, it looks as though you are off to the best start. The ♦6 is played from dummy, and partner plays the ♦A, winning the trick as declarer plays the ♦3. That looks like a good start. Partner plays back the ♦9, and declarer plays the ♦Q. You are at the critical point in the defense. What are you playing to this trick?

It's tempting to capture East's ♦Q with the ♦K, an honor with an honor. You can then continue to establish your winners in diamonds while you still have the ♦K as a possible entry.

So let's see what will happen if you do play the ♦K. Suppose you win the ♦K. Declarer discards a spade from dummy. Now what?

With the only high outstanding diamond being the ♦J, you'd like to establish more winners in the diamond suit while you still have the ♠K as a potential enter.

Let's see what will happen when you continue with another diamond. Suppose you lead the ♦10. This will not only promote your other diamonds as winners, it will serve as a suit preference signal, showing your potential entry in spades. Another spade is discarded from dummy, partner plays the ♦2, and declarer wins the ♦J. Your remaining diamonds are now established as winners. If you gain the lead with the ♠K, you'll be able to defeat the contract.

Declarer leads the ♣10. You play low, a low club is played from dummy, and partner wins the ♣K. That's good, your side has regained the lead.

Partner leads a spade, but declarer wins the ♠A. Now your ♠K is also established as a winner.

However, declarer claims the rest of the tricks, making an overtrick. Declarer has dummy's five established club winners and also three heart winners. Your side got only two diamonds and a club. That's too bad.

What could you have done?

Let's go back and take a look.

## Recommended Defense

You lead the ♦5, and partner wins the trick with the ♦A. That's a good start. Partner returns the ♦9, and declarer plays the ♦Q.

Before automatically winning the ♦K, it's time to figure out what's going on in the diamond suit.

Can partner hold the ♦J?

No!

Partner wouldn't lead back the ♦9 from a holding headed by the ♦J-9. So declarer still has the ♦J.

Could partner have started with four diamonds, leaving declarer with only the ♦J remaining?

No!

Starting with four diamonds, partner would not return the ♦9. Partner would lead low, the original fourth best, with three remaining diamonds. The ♦9 looks to be the top of a remaining doubleton. That means declarer still has the ♦J and another diamond remaining.

Armed with this knowledge, what should you play to this trick?

The ♦4!

Looking at dummy, you can see that declarer presumably has enough tricks to make the contract if declarer holds the ♣K. So you are going to need partner to hold the ♣K if you are to defeat the contract. You need to leave partner with a diamond to play on gaining the lead.

After winning the ♦Q, declarer leads the and, when you play low, takes a finesse. Unfortunately for declarer, the finesse loses and partner wins the ♣K.

Partner now leads the ♦2, the diamond you left partner by not winning the ♦K earlier and continuing diamonds. This traps declarer's remaining ♦J and low diamond. Declarer tries the ♦J, but this time you win the ♦A. Your ♦10 removes the last diamond remaining in declarer's hand. You can take another trick with the ♦8. That's the fifth trick for the defense.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but you've defeated the 3NT contract. Your side got one club trick and four diamond tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 9532<br>♥ JT84<br>♦ A92<br>♣ K5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q86<br>♥ K75<br>♦ 6<br>♣ AQJ873</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AJT<br>♥ AQ62<br>♦ QJ73<br>♣ T9</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ K74<br>♥ 93<br>♦ KT854<br>♣ 642</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

In this type of situation, it's important for South to know how many diamonds North holds. When returning partner's suit, you normally lead the top of a doubleton and low, the original fourth highest, with three or more. So partner returned the ♦9 from a holding of ♦9-2. With ♦9-7-2 remaining, partner would have led back the ♦2.

As can be seen from this deal, it's important to return the "right" card in partner's suit. This serves as a count signal, telling partner how the suit is divided around the table.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/19)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/14)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/19#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.