---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-20'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/20'

next: false
---

# 2024-11-21

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ A54<br>♥ QJT87<br>♦ KJ<br>♣ AQT</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. West is the dealer and passes. Your partner, North, passes, and so does East. You must decide what call to make in fourth position.

There are 17 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. Although the hand is balanced, it is too strong to open 1NT when the partnership range is 15-17 points. Instead, start with the five-card major suit.

West passes, and partner raises right to 4♥. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Partner's jump to 4♥ is a preemptive jump raise, showing a weak hand but, typically, five-card or longer heart support. You have a strong hand but can't expect too much in high cards from partner. The partnership should be high enough. You pass.

West also passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 4♥ with West on lead.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠2, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 973<br>♥ A9532<br>♦ QT94<br>♣ 6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A54<br>♥ QJT87<br>♦ KJ<br>♣ AQT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has what you might expect. Five-card heart support and some distribution, but only the ♦Q on the side.

The first step in making a plan for a suit contract is to consider the potential losers. There is one potential heart loser since the opponents hold the ♥K. You will be left with two potential spade losers once the ♠A is driven out. That's likely to happen early in the play since West has led a spade. There is one sure diamond loser since the opponents hold the ♦A. There are two potential club losers since both the ♣K and ♣J are missing. That's a total of six potential losers: one heart, two spades, one diamond, and two clubs. You can afford only three.

You might avoid the heart loser with the help of a finesse if West holds the ♥K. You could lead the ♥Q, hoping to trap West's ♥K. That's a 50% chance. If you lead the ♥Q and the ♥K doesn't appear from West, would it be better to play the ♥A than take the finesse?

Even though there are ten combined hearts between declarer and dummy, the odds of East holding a singleton ♥K are only 24%. So the finesse is a much better choice if there are no other considerations.

There's nothing that can be done about the two spade losers within the suit itself. However, you could hope to discard one or more losers on extra winners in another suit. For example, you can promote two extra diamond winners in dummy by driving out the ♦A and then discarding both the spade losers from your hand. What's the problem with that idea on this deal?

West has led a spade, so the defenders are going to be able to drive out the ♠A before you can drive out the ♦A. They will take their spade winners before you can make use of the diamonds. Since West has led what looks to be a fourth best ♠2, it won't help to hold up winning the for one round. Whoever holds the ♦A will still have a spade to lead. If you can't use the diamonds to discard the spade losers, is there an alternative?

Although you could plan to simply ruff the two potential club losers in dummy, you might also consider leading the singleton club from dummy and finessing the ♣Q. If West holds the ♣K, however, then you will have created a loser that you could have avoided. You'll go down for certain, even if the heart finesse works, since you will lose two spades, a diamond, and a club. If East holds the ♣K, however, the club finesse will win. You can discard one of dummy's spades on the ♣A. You will then lose only one spade trick because the other spade loser can be ruffed in dummy. You'll make the contract even if the heart finesse loses.

So you have two chances to make the contract. If the 50% heart finesse works, you will lose only two spades and a diamond. If the 50% club finesse works, you will lose at most a spade, a diamond, and a heart. Whenever you have two chances, you want to combine them if possible. Is it possible on this deal?

If you start with the club finesse and it loses, you will lose four tricks right away as the opponents will take their two spade tricks and the ♦A. It will be too late to try the heart finesse. If you start with the heart finesse and it loses, you will also lose four tricks right away since the opponents will again take their spade and diamond winners. It will be too late to try the club finesse. So it may appear as though you must simply guess which finesse to take.

Or is there still a way to give yourself more than one chance?

Let's see what will happen on this deal if you decide to take the heart finesse first.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠2. You play low from dummy, and East plays the ♠K. You have your first decision. Should you win this trick?

Since West's ♠2 appears to be fourth best, the defenders' spades are presumably divided 4-3. It won't do any good to hold up winning the first trick since both players will still have a spade left when their side gains the lead. It also wouldn't hurt to hold up one round, but let's assume you win the first trick.

There's no reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. Since you are hoping that West holds the ♥K, you start by leading the ♥Q. Some defenders always cover an honor with an honor. It would solve all your problems if West played the ♥K. West plays a low heart, however. What now?

Suppose you decide to follow with a low heart from dummy, taking the finesse. Unfortunately, East wins with the ♥K.

You know what will happen next. The opponents now take two spade tricks. And they also take the ♦A.

You have the rest of the tricks, but you already lost four tricks with one heart, two spades, and a diamond. 4♥ is down one. It's too bad you made the wrong guess with the heart finesse.

Was there a way to avoid it?

Let's go back and look.

## Recommended Play

When you are dealing with two suits each missing a king and a finesse for either will land the contract, but you are going down if you take the wrong one, consider using the two-king combining rule!

Play the ace of the longer suit first. If the king doesn't appear, take a finesse in the shorter suit.

Let's apply this rule to this deal. West has led the ♠2, and you win with the ♠A. Now what?

Next, you lead the ♥Q, and West follows with the ♥6. The "rule" says to play the ace of the longer suit first. So play the ♥A. That gives you the chance that East started with a singleton ♥K. East follows with a low heart, however. So much for that chance.

You can't afford to give up the lead yet. The defenders will take their four winners. It's time for your second chance. You lead a low club from dummy, and East follows with a low club. What now?

You have no choice but to try the club finesse. You've already given up on the heart finesse and the opponents have two spade winners and a diamond to take. Play the ♣Q. Of course, if this loses, you will go down an extra trick and will be dismayed if the heart finesse was working all along. This time, fortune is on your side. West follows with a low club. The club finesse has succeeded.

On the ♣A, you discard one of dummy's spades. The last club can be ruffed in dummy. A trick must still be lost to the ♦A. The defenders can take a spade winner, but only one. Having discarded a spade from dummy, you can ruff in dummy if another spade is played.

You have to lose one more trick to the ♥K, but that's all. You've made the 4♥ contract, losing only one heart, one diamond, and one spade trick.

## Summary

Here's the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 973<br>♥ A9532<br>♦ QT94<br>♣ 6</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ QT82<br>♥ 6<br>♦ A865<br>♣ J983</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KJ6<br>♥ K4<br>♦ 732<br>♣ K7542</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ A54<br>♥ QJT87<br>♦ KJ<br>♣ AQT</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If the heart finesse is taken first, East will win the ♥K and the contract will go down.

You need to follow the "two-king rule" to make the contract unless you can simply guess to take the club finesse rather than the heart finesse. The advantage of playing the ♥A first, even though the heart finesse is the best play in isolation, is that it gives you a 24% chance of finding the singleton ♥K. When the ♥K doesn't fall, you can fall back on the 50% club finesse. Combining the two chances gives you an overall 63% chance, your best bet on this deal.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/21)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/18)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/21#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.