---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-21'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/21'

next: false
---

# 2024-11-22

On this deal, which defender holds the critical card?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKT65<br>♥ T6<br>♦ 8<br>♣ KQJ94</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make in first position.

You have 13 high-card points plus 1 length point for both the fifth spade and the fifth club, bringing the total to 15. The general guideline with two five-card suits is to open the higher-ranking. A few partnerships prefer to open 1♣ with five clubs and five spades, but the modern style is to stick to the guideline and open 1♠. Let's go with that.

West passes. Partner, North, responds 2♦. East passes, and you have to decide on a rebid after this start.

Partner's response makes things a bit awkward since you now have to go to the three level to show the second suit. That's why some players prefer opening 1♣ with this distribution. Still, you have good suits and a good hand, enough to rebid 3♣ whether playing standard methods or two-over-one game force. The 3♣ bid is game forcing in either case.

After West passes, partner bids 3♠. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Partner is showing three-card spade support, otherwise partner would have found another call. So you've found an eight-card fit. You don't have anything extra for the bidding so far, so you don't want to suggest a slam. You can settle for bidding game in spades.

Everyone passes, and you are now the declarer in 4♠.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♣</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♣7, and partner puts down the dummy.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J98<br>♥ KQ85<br>♦ AK75<br>♣ T8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKT65<br>♥ T6<br>♦ 8<br>♣ KQJ94</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You have to find a way to take the ten tricks needed for 4♠.

In planning the play in a suit contract, you start by considering the potential losers you have. How many losers are there in 4♠?

There's one potential spade loser since you are missing the ♠Q. There's a potential heart loser since the opponents hold the ♥A. There are no diamond losers, but there is a club loser since the opponents hold the ♣A. So it appears there are only three potential losers, a spade, a heart, and a club. You likely have to lose a heart and a club, but you may be able to make an overtrick if the ♠Q is located favorably.

Missing five spades including the ♠Q, the initial odds favor taking a finesse, following the guideline of eight ever, nine never. So it would appear all you need to do is to try the spade finesse for an overtrick.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♣7. Is there any reason you should be suspicious about this opening lead?

Yes!

You bid clubs during the auction. It's unusual for the opening leader to lead a suit bid by declarer. Typically, if it's unattractive to lead an unbid suit, or perhaps a trump, the opening lead tends to be through the suit bid by dummy, dummy's likely strength.

Anyway, there's nothing you can do at this point except follow suit from dummy. East wins the ♣A, making all your remaining clubs winners. You have a choice of clubs to play to this trick, whatever you think might confuse the opponents. However, let's just follow with the lowest club. East returns the ♣6. You follow suit, but West ruffs with a low spade! Now you know the reason West led your suit. West was hoping to get one or more ruffs.

West leads back a heart, you play dummy's ♥Q, and East wins the ♥A. You've now lost the first three tricks. East returns a heart, and you win the trick with dummy's ♥K.

All of a sudden, finding the ♠Q has become all important. It's no longer an overtrick; it's for the contract. If West started with four spades, including the ♠Q, there's nothing you can do. West is going to get a second spade trick no matter what. If West started with two or three spades, including the ♠Q, however, or East started with the ♠Q, the contract is still makeable. You'll have to hope that's the case.

There's no harm in drawing one round of trumps with a high spade. Maybe the ♠Q will appear, solving all the problems. You play a spade to the ♠K and both defenders follow with low spades. No yet. You don't have to make a decision in spades right now, you can plan to lead another spade from dummy and see what happens. If East shows out, you'll have to lose a trick to West's remaining doubleton ♠Q. You cross to dummy with a diamond. You lead the ♠J and East follows with a low spade. That's good news. It means the contract is makeable. All you have to do is guess which defender holds the ♠Q. If East has it, you can take a finesse. If West has it, you can play the ♠A to drop it.

In making the initial plan, the odds favored taking the finesse. That was before you knew anything about the layout of the defenders' cards. Has anything happened to change your thinking?

Maybe.

West started with only one club and East with five. Both defenders have also shown up with two spades, two hearts, and a diamond. So West has seven unknown cards left, East has only three. The statistical odds are now more than 2:1 that West holds the ♠Q. Should you go with the odds and play the ♠A, or continue with the original plan and take the finesse?

Let's see what will happen if you go with the new odds. You go up with the ♠A and West shows out.

You still have to lose a trick to the ♠Q, down one.

Shucks, you should have gone with the finesse.

Did you miss any other clues?

Yes. There were two clues that might sway you in favor of taking the finesse rather than going with the strict odds.

Let's go back through the play to see what they were.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♣7, and East wins the ♣A. East returns a club, and West ruffs. West leads a heart, and East wins the ♥A. East then returns a heart, and you win in dummy. Does anything strike you as odd about this play?

Yes! Why didn't East lead another club?

That would seem the natural thing to do. If West holds the ♠Q, that would immediately defeat the contract since West could ruff higher than dummy. What conclusion can you draw from this piece of information?

Either East has made a mistake, or East knows that West won't be able to ruff higher than dummy's ♠J!

That would only be the case if East holds the ♠Q!

Then East wouldn't want to give away the location of the ♠Q. When West can only ruff with a low spade, you will know for sure to take a finesse against East's ♠Q. So East made a clever play by returning a heart, leaving it to you to decide whether to play the ♠A-K or finesse.

Just in case East has made a mistake, it doesn't hurt to play one high trump. You don't need to take the finesse right away. You play a spade to one of your high spades. You cross back to dummy. You lead the just in case East is tempted to cover an honor with an honor. East is too clever for that ploy and plays low. Before making your final decision, is there any other clue available?

A defender will often lead a singleton against a suit contract, hoping to get a ruff. However, it is not as attractive when holding three spades including the ♠Q. The defender usually hopes to get a trick with the naturally, when declarer takes a finesse, for example. Leading a singleton in this situation can be dangerous since you may establish tricks for declarer when you were going to get a trump trick anyway.

Based on the clues available, you play a low spade, taking the finesse. As you predicted, the finesse wins, despite East's clever attempt to lead you astray.

You draw East's last trump, and the rest of the tricks are yours. You lost a club, a heart, and a club ruff, but you didn't lose a trick to the ♠Q. You've made the 4♠ contract!

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ J98<br>♥ KQ85<br>♦ AK75<br>♣ T8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 42<br>♥ J9432<br>♦ QT643<br>♣ 7</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ Q73<br>♥ A7<br>♦ J92<br>♣ A6532</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKT65<br>♥ T6<br>♦ 8<br>♣ KQJ94</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Clues come in all forms. In many situations, you can draw inferences from what the defenders do or don't do. You generally want to assume the defenders are doing their best to defeat you. They'll still make mistakes but, the better the opponents are, the more likely there is to be logic in how they are defending.

What if your inference from East's play proves wrong on this deal and you lose to the ♠Q in West's hand when you could have gone with the odds?

Then you can take solace in the fact that they could always have defeated the contract if East had simply led back another club.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/22)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/21)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/22#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.