---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-24'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/24'

next: false
---

# 2024-11-25

In today's column, what's the best way to eliminate the extra losers?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 64<br>♥ A7642<br>♦ KJ76<br>♣ A8</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You hold this hand as South. North and South are vulnerable, and East and West are not vulnerable. As dealer you get to choose an opening call.

With 12 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit, this hand is strong enough to open 1♥.

West passes. North responds 1♠, and East passes. It is time to select a rebid.

Partner's 1♠ response shows four or more spades and about 6 or more points and is forcing. With two doubletons, you have an unbalanced hand. You can make a rebid of 2♦ to show the second suit.

West passes. North jumps to 4♥, and East passes. There is another chance to select a call.

Partner is showing three-card heart support and enough strength to want to be in a game contract. You have nothing more to do other than pass.

West passes. The auction has ended and you are now the declarer in 4♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>4♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♥10.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q873<br>♥ KQ5<br>♦ A4<br>♣ J762</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 64<br>♥ A7642<br>♦ KJ76<br>♣ A8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Partner has the expected three-card heart support and 12 high-card points plus 1 dummy point for the doubleton diamond.

Making 4♥ will require ten tricks. In a suit contract, begin by counting potential losers. There will be no heart loser if the defenders' five hearts divide 3-2, as expected. If the hearts divide 4-1, however, there will be a heart loser, and there will be two heart losers if they divide 5-0. There are two spade losers since the defenders have both the ♠A and ♠K. There will be two diamond losers remaining after the ♦A and ♦K are gone. There will be a club loser remaining after the ♣A is gone. Assuming the heart suit behaves, there are still five potential losers: two spades, two diamonds, and one club. Two of the losers must be eliminated to make the contract.

There is no chance to avoid the two spade loser or the club loser.

So you can't afford a bad break in the heart suit and the only hope is to avoid both diamond losers.

With a doubleton diamond in dummy, you could plan to ruff both diamond losers. However, there's a problem. The second loser would have to be ruffed with one of dummy's high hearts and that would create an extra heart loser even if the missing hearts divide 3-2, as you are hoping. Since you can only ruff one diamond loser in dummy, the best chance to avoid the second loser is to try the diamond finesse, hoping East holds the ♦Q. That's better odds than hoping the ♦Q will fall in three rounds.

Is there anything else to worry about?

Let's see.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♥10. You are immediately faced with your first challenge. Where should you win this trick?

Since you need dummy's low heart to ruff one of the diamond losers, you have to win this trick with one of dummy's high hearts. You play the ♥Q, winning the trick as East follow with a low heart. At least the hearts haven't divided 5-0.

Time to go after the extra tricks you need from the diamond suit. You play the ♦A and everyone follows with low diamonds. You continue with dummy's remaining diamond and, when East follows with a low diamond, you finesse the ♦J. Success! This wins the trick as West follows with a low diamond. You have eliminated one of the diamond losers.

You can take a trick with the ♦K. Again both defenders follow suit as you discard a spade from dummy. You lead the last diamond loser and West ruffs with the ♥9. You have to overruff with the ♥K to win the trick. That eliminates the last diamond loser, but you heart holding has been weakened by West's ruff.

There are only two hearts outstanding, so you will still be okay if they divide 1-1. When you lead a heart from dummy, however, East follows but West shows out, discarding a spade. East started with three hearts and now holds a heart winner.

These are the remaining cards and you still have two spade losers and one club loser to go with the heart loser.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q87<br>♥ 5<br>♦ <br>♣ J762</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ52<br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ Q954</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KT9<br>♥ J8<br>♦ <br>♣ KT3</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 64<br>♥ A764<br>♦ <br>♣ A8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

That's down one.

It was good that the diamond finesse worked but unfortunate West was able to ruff the fourth round of diamonds to promote a trump winner for East.

Could you have avoided that?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West leads the ♥10. You must win this with one of dummy's high hearts to preserve the low heart to ruff one of the diamond losers. You need to go after the diamond suit while you still have a low heart in dummy with which to ruff one of the losers. Both defenders follow when the ♦A is played. Dummy's remaining low diamond is led and when East follows with a low diamond, you finesse the ♦J. This wins. East must hold the ♦Q.

You still need to ruff a diamond loser in dummy but can't afford to play the ♦K first. Even if the diamonds divide 4-3, as you are hoping, that would leave one defender void in diamonds. When you then lead the fourth round of diamonds, a defender may be able to overruff, or force dummy to ruff with a high heart, creating a heart winner for the defense.

Instead, you lead the remaining low diamond and ruff with dummy's low trump.

Everyone follows, and you have eliminated both diamond losers. You play dummy's remaining high heart and, when both defenders follow suit, the contract is now secure. The defenders' hearts have divided 3-2. You can get to your hand safely with the ♣A. You can now draw the defenders' last trump with the ♥A. West discards a spade and East follows with the ♥J. It's now safe to take the ♦K. You still have two heart winners to take.

The defenders have the last three tricks, but you have made the contract. You lost two spades and one club, but that's all. You didn't lose any heart or diamond tricks.

## Summary

This is the complete deal.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ Q873<br>♥ KQ5<br>♦ A4<br>♣ J762</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AJ52<br>♥ T9<br>♦ T82<br>♣ Q954</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KT9<br>♥ J83<br>♦ Q953<br>♣ KT3</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 64<br>♥ A7642<br>♦ KJ76<br>♣ A8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Having a made a plan to eliminate two diamond losers, declarer must Consider the Order. Declarer needs to keep a low heart in dummy to ruff one of the diamond losers. Declarer needs all three high hearts to draw trumps and avoid a trump loser, assuming the missing hearts divide 3-2. After winning the first high heart in dummy, declarer needs to immediately take the diamond finesse, hoping the ♦Q is favorably placed. When the diamond finesse works, declarer then wants to eliminate the remaining diamond loser by ruffing it with dummy's low trump. Declarer has to delay taking the ♦K until all the defenders' trumps have been drawn.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/25)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/22)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/25#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.