---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-25'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/25'

next:
  text: '2024-11-27'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/27'
---

# 2024-11-26

In today's deal, can the auction help you on defense?

<Badge type="tip" text="Defense"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ T875<br>♥ QJT86<br>♦ 8<br>♣ A87</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are sitting South. Your side is vulnerable and the opponents are not. East is the dealer and opens 1♠. You have to decide what call to make.

With 7 high-card points and a five-card heart suit of reasonable quality, you might have overcalled if East had opened 1♣ or 1♦. The hand, however, is not nearly good enough to overcall at the two level.

West responds 2♦. Your partner, North, passes, and East raises to 3♦. You have another chance to make a call.

Naturally, you pass again.

West jumps to the game level, 4♠. Partner and East both pass. You have one more chance to make a call.

You have nothing to say.

Your pass ends the auction, and you now have to choose an opening lead against East's 4♠ contract.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♠</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>2♦</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>3♦</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4♠</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Possible Defense

When on lead against a suit contract, leading a singleton is always a consideration, hoping to use the trump suit against declarer by getting one or more ruffs.

Although there are certainly many times when it is the best choice, there are also times when there may be better choices.

Let's see what will happen on this deal if you choose to lead the singleton diamond. You lead the singleton ♦8.

Let's look at all the hands to see how the play will likely go.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 2<br>♥ A532<br>♦ QJ42<br>♣ 9432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q93<br>♥ K97<br>♦ AT75<br>♣ KJ6</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ64<br>♥ 4<br>♦ K963<br>♣ QT5</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T875<br>♥ QJT86<br>♦ 8<br>♣ A87</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Declarer plays a low diamond from dummy, partner puts in the ♦J, and declarer wins with the ♦K.

Declarer has no reason to delay drawing trumps. Declarer starts with the ♠A. Declarer then plays a spade to dummy's ♠Q. Your partner shows out on this trick. Declarer now knows that the trumps have divided 4-1, but that's not a problem. Declarer continues with another spade back to the ♠K. Declarer now draws your last trump with the ♠J. So much for getting any diamond ruffs.

Declarer next goes about developing a winner in the diamond suit. Declarer leads a diamond. You show out, and declarer wins with dummy's ♦A. Declarer leads another diamond, and your partner wins the trick with the ♦Q. That's the first trick for the defense.

It won't do any good for partner to lead hearts. That would give declarer a trick with dummy's ♥K. So partner merely returns another diamond. That does no harm since declarer's diamond winner is already established.

Declarer now goes about promoting winners in the club suit. Declarer leads dummy's ♣K, and you win with the ♣A. Belatedly, you lead the ♥Q. Dummy's ♥K is played, and partner wins the ♥A. Partner returns a heart, but declarer ruffs with the last trump.

Declarer has the last two tricks with the club winners. All declarer lost was a heart, a diamond, and a club - making the 4♠ contract.

Let's go back and see if there is a way to defeat the contract.

## Recommended Defense

When thinking about leading a singleton against a suit contract, start by reviewing the auction.

The opponents bid and raised diamonds, so they are likely to have length and strength in the suit. If you lead a diamond, it's unlikely that your partner is going to be able to win and return a diamond for you to ruff. Partner will need to get the lead before trumps are drawn if partner is going to give you a diamond ruff. Also, if partner has some high cards in diamonds, leading a diamond may help declarer establish tricks in the suit. On this deal, partner might get two diamond tricks if you don't lead a diamond - if declarer starts by playing the ♦K, for example. Leading a diamond makes it easy for declarer to develop a third trick in the suit.

You also need to consider your trump holding before leading a singleton. With length in the trump suit, declarer is going to have a difficult time drawing trumps and won't have many - or any - left afterwards. It might be better to try to establish winners in a long suit and force declarer to ruff. You might even finish with more trumps than declarer.

You have a very attractive alternative to leading the singleton diamond. You have a solid sequence in hearts. By leading a heart, you will likely be able to establish or take winners in the suit, and you may be able to use the hearts to run declarer out of trumps.

Let's see what will happen on this deal if you lead a heart. You lead the ♥Q. Dummy's ♥K is trapped. Declarer likely won't play the ♥K, "knowing" that your partner holds the ♥A. Your ♥Q wins the first trick. You continue with the ♥J. Declarer again plays low from dummy. With no hearts remaining, declarer ruffs this trick. That's good news. Declarer is down to the same length in trumps as you.

Declarer starts drawing trumps. Declarer is hoping to lose only a heart trick, a diamond trick, and a club trick. Declarer takes a trick with the ♠A as both you and partner follow suit. Declarer plays a second round of trumps to dummy's ♠Q. On this round, your partner shows out. Declarer is now in trouble.

Declarer is probably better off to stop drawing trumps at this point, but let's see what happens if declarer does draw all of your trumps. Declarer wins a trick with the ♠K. Declarer plays the ♠J, drawing your last trump.

Next, declarer has to go about promoting winners in the club suit. Declarer leads the ♣Q, and you win the ♣A.

Now you can see the advantage of running declarer out of trumps. You lead another heart, and partner wins the trick with the ♥A. Declarer has no trumps to ruff this trick. Partner leads another heart, and you win the trick. You can take yet another heart trick.

Declarer has the rest of the tricks, but the 4♠ contract is down two.

Could declarer have done any better?

Let's see.

## Another Recommended Defense

You lead the ♥Q, declarer plays a low heart from dummy, letting you win the first trick. You continue with the ♥J. Declarer shows out and ruffs this trick with a low spade. Declarer plays the ♠A, drawing a round of trumps as both you and partner follow suit. Declarer plays a second round of trumps and discovers that the trumps are breaking badly. Your partner shows out on this trick and you have started with four trumps.

Suppose declarer decides to stop drawing any more trumps. Instead, declarer leads a club to drive out your ♣A. What next?

You carry on with your plan by leading another heart. Declarer ruffs this trick. Notice, however, that you now have more trumps than declarer!

Declarer can take the two club winners as you have to follow suit. Declarer leads a diamond from dummy. Partner "splits the honors" and declarer is forced to win the trick with the ♦K. Declarer leads another diamond, and you get to ruff this trick. (You could also discard a heart if you prefer.) You get a diamond ruff after you didn't lead a diamond.

It doesn't really matter what you lead at this point, but let's say you choose to lead yet another heart. Declarer can ruff this in dummy and discard a diamond loser... a ruff and a sluff, but it's not going to help declarer.

Declarer leads dummy's ♦A, and you get to ruff for a second time. That's the fourth trick for the defense, defeating the contract. And notice that you got two ruffs in this scenario by not leading your singleton diamond!

Declarer has the last trick, but the 4♠ contract is down one.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 2<br>♥ A532<br>♦ QJ42<br>♣ 9432</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ Q93<br>♥ K97<br>♦ AT75<br>♣ KJ6</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ AKJ64<br>♥ 4<br>♦ K963<br>♣ QT5</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T875<br>♥ QJT86<br>♦ 8<br>♣ A87</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

With length in the opponent's trump suit, it is usually better to lead a long suit rather than a short suit. The idea is to force declarer to ruff so often that you will finish with more trumps than declarer. This is referred to as a forcing defense.

It's also a good idea to avoid leading a singleton in a suit bid by the opponents. You might help declarer establish tricks in the suit. If you do lead a suit the opponents have been bidding, however, partner should have no difficulty recognizing that you are leading a singleton!

This hand is a good example of when not to lead a singleton. If you lead your singleton, you don't get any ruffs, and declarer makes the contract. If you don't lead your singleton, you may get more than one ruff!

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/26)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/23)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="tip" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/12/03)

### By Date

Use the links below.