---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-27'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/27'

next: false
---

# 2024-11-28

Today's column is by World Champion Eddie Kantar.

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AKQJ<br>♥ J75<br>♦ K4<br>♣ AQT2</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. Both sides are vulnerable. You have to decide what call to make in first position.

You have a balanced hand with 20 high-card points. That fits nicely into the partnership range of 20-21 points for a 2NT opening bid.

West passes, and partner, North, raises to 3NT. East passes, and the auction is back to you.

Having described the hand, you have nothing more to say. Partner has decided How High and Where to play the contract.

West passes, and you are now the declarer in 3NT.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>2NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♦3, and partner puts down the dummy.

<td>♠ AKQJ<br>♥ J75<br>♦ K4<br>♣ AQT2</td>

Holding a flat hand, partner chose to raise notrump rather than look for a major-suit fit.

As declarer, you start by counting the number of sure tricks in the combined hands. There are four immediate spade winners, the ♠A, ♠K, ♠Q, and ♠J. There are no immediate heart winners since the opponents hold the ♥A and ♥K. There is one sure club trick, the ♣A. You don't start with any sure diamond tricks, but West has led the ♦3. No matter what East plays to the first trick, you will be able to get a trick with the ♦K. That's six sure winners: four spades, a club, and a diamond. You need to find three more.

You aren't getting any more tricks from spades and you aren't getting more than one trick from diamonds.

In hearts, you can establish two tricks through promotion by driving out the opponents' ♥A and ♥K.

You can get three extra winners in clubs with the help of repeated finesses if East holds the ♣K. Even if you lose a trick to the ♣K, you will have promoted two extra club winners.

It looks as though you can get tricks from hearts and clubs. Should you, however, plan to try to promote winners in hearts?

That won't work.

The defenders will be able to establish three diamond winners, perhaps more if West started with a five-card or longer suit. When you drive out the high hearts, the defenders will have enough tricks to defeat the contract.

So you are going to need East to hold the ♣K to get the three extra winners you need with the help of the club finesse.

Having made a plan, are there any potential problems?

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♦3. You play the ♦9 from dummy, and East plays the ♦A. Right away, you have your first challenge. What are you playing to this trick?

Since you were planning on getting a diamond trick, it may seem automatic to play your low diamond on this trick.

Let's see what will happen if you do. Suppose you play the ♦4. East's ♦A wins the first trick. East returns the ♦8, and you win the second trick with the ♦K as West follows with the ♦2 and the ♦10 is played from dummy. From West's lead of the ♦3 followed by the ♦2, it looks as though West started with five diamonds. What now?

Your plan is to take the club finesse, but there's a problem. You don't have an entry to dummy!

The best you can do is try to get to dummy with a heart. Suppose you lead a low heart. West hops up with the ♥A. West isn't going to let you get over to dummy. West takes a trick with the ♦Q, and you are in trouble. You don't even have a comfortable discard from your hand.

Let's suppose you give up on the hearts and discard a heart from your hand. West leads another diamond and East shows out. West did start with a five-card diamond suit. You discard another heart. Maybe the opponents will lead clubs for you. West takes another diamond winner. Fortunately, that's West's last diamond. This time, you have to discard a club. The contract is already down one.

Having watched you discard hearts, West leads a heart and East wins the ♥K. You have to discard another club. The contract is now down two. Worse, East now leads a spade, putting you in your hand. You still can't take a club finesse.

You can take your spade winners and the ♣A, but you'll eventually lose another trick to the opponents' ♣K. 3NT is down three! Not a good result.

What could you have done differently?

Let's go back to trick one.

## Another Possible Play

West leads the ♦3, and all would be well if dummy's ♦9 won the first trick. You could then take the club finesse. However, East wins the trick with the ♦A. You are at a critical point in the play. How can you find a way to get an entry to dummy?

Play the ♦K!

This looks like it is giving up your sure diamond winner, but by unblocking the ♦K, you can force an entry to dummy.

Let's see. East returns a diamond and you follow with a low diamond. That presents West with a problem. If West doesn't win this trick, you will win in dummy, getting back your diamond trick and reaching dummy at the same time. West chooses to win the ♦Q. But what can West do now? If West doesn't lead another diamond - leading a spade, for example - you can lead hearts and force an entry to dummy that way. The defenders will have only two diamond tricks and two heart tricks, and you can try the club finesse.

West decides to lead another diamond to establish the defenders' remaining diamonds as winners. West is presumably hoping to regain the lead with a heart. You don't need your hearts any more, so you can discard one. You want to hold on to all your spades and clubs.

You've got back your diamond trick and you've managed to reach dummy. You have another important decision. What are you leading next?

It might seem as though you should lead the ♣J. If East covers with the ♣K, you'll have the extra club winners you need. If East doesn't cover, you'll still be in dummy and can repeat the finesse.

Let's see what will happen on the actual deal. Suppose you lead the ♣J. East plays low, you play low, and West follows with a low club. Success. East holds the ♣K. Since you are still in dummy, you can repeat the finesse. You lead another club and, when East plays low, you play the ♣10. This wins as West follows with a low club.

However, you are now in your hand. You can't repeat the finesse again. The best you can do is play the ♣A and hope the ♣K falls. Unfortunately, West shows out and East follows with another low club.

You can take your four spade winners, but the opponents have the last three tricks. 3NT is down one. At least that's better than going down three. Too bad East held four clubs. You would have been okay if East held only one, two, or three clubs.

Or could you have handled the suit differently?

Let's see.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♦3. When East wins the trick with the ♦A, you correctly play the ♦K, planning to use the ♦J or ♦10 as an entry to dummy for the club finesse. East returns a diamond, and West wins with the ♦Q. West leads a third round of diamonds, establishing West's remaining diamonds as winners.

Having won the trick in dummy, you've got the entry you need to take the club finesse. How can you be sure of taking all four club tricks if East holds the ♣K?

Lead the ♣9！

Let's see the difference that makes. Here are all the remaining cards.

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 532<br>♥ QT98<br>♦ <br>♣ J94</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 986<br>♥ A32<br>♦ 75<br>♣ 65</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T74<br>♥ K64<br>♦ <br>♣ K873</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQJ<br>♥ J7<br>♦ <br>♣ AQT2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

If East were to play the ♣K, you would have all the club tricks. East, however, follows with a low club. You also play a low club. The first finesse wins as West follows with a low club. Now you can continue with the ♣J. Again, it won't do East any good to play the ♣K since you'll then have all the high clubs. East plays a low club, you underplay the with your ♣10, and West follows with another low club. Your second finesse has won.

The difference this time is that you are still in dummy and can repeat the finesse once more. When East follows with a low club, you play the winning the trick as West shows out. The third finesse has won!

You can now take the ♣A and your four spade winners. You've made the 3NT contract by taking four spades, a diamond, and four club tricks.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ 532<br>♥ QT98<br>♦ JT9<br>♣ J94</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 986<br>♥ A32<br>♦ Q7532<br>♣ 65</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ T74<br>♥ K64<br>♦ A86<br>♣ K873</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AKQJ<br>♥ J75<br>♦ K4<br>♣ AQT2</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

This deal requires you to make two good plays as declarer.

The first is to see that playing the ♦K under East's ♦A would help you create an entry to dummy. If you don't do that, you can never reach dummy and will end up going down three.

The second is to visualize that starting the club suit by leading the ♣9 from dummy will allow you to take three club finesses if necessary. You would also have to start with the ♣9 if dummy held the ♣Q-9-4 opposite ♣A-J-10-2.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/28)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/25)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/28#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.