---
prev:
  text: '2024-11-28'
  link: '/en/learning/prob/2024/11/28'

next: false
---

# 2024-11-29

On this deal, is there a better chance than a straightforward finesse?

<Badge type="warning" text="Play"/>

## The Auction

<table class="hand">
	<tr>
		<td>♠ AQ62<br>♥ KQJ93<br>♦ AQ6<br>♣ 5</td>
	</tr>
</table>

You are the dealer sitting South. The opponents are vulnerable and your side is not. You have to decide what call to make with this hand in first position.

You have 18 high-card points plus 1 length point for the five-card heart suit. That's not enough to open the bidding 2♣, but you are at the top of the range for a one-level opening. Start with the five-card major suit.

West passes. Partner, North, responds 3♥. This is a limit raise, showing four-card or longer heart support and about 10-12 points. East passes, and you have to decide what call to make after this development.

With a maximum-strength opening, you have too much to just settle for game. Slam should have a good chance if partner has, say, two aces and a king. You could start a control-showing sequence by bidding 3♠. However, it's more straightforward to simply use the Blackwood convention to ask about aces. Let's go with that.

West passes. In reply to your Blackwood convention inquiry, partner bids 5♥, showing two aces. East passes, and you have to decide what to do next.

Since the partnership has all the aces, it's tempting to continue Blackwood and ask about kings. However, partner already has 8 points for the two aces, so partner can't have more than one king. It seems right to simply settle for a small slam in hearts. That should be enough.

Everyone passes, and the auction is over. You are now the declarer in 6♥.

<table class="auction">
	<tr>
		<th>North</th>
		<th>East</th>
		<th>South</th>
		<th>West</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
		<td>1♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>3♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>4NT</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>5♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>6♥</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td>Pass</td>
		<td></td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

## Planning the Play

West leads the ♠9, and partner puts down the dummy.、

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T83<br>♥ AT876<br>♦ T5<br>♣ AQ8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ <br>♥ <br>♦ <br>♣ </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ62<br>♥ KQJ93<br>♦ AQ6<br>♣ 5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

You must now find a way to take the twelve tricks needed to make 6♥.

In planning the play in a suit contract, you start by considering the number of losers you have in 6♥. How many are there?

You don't have any heart losers. You start with three potential spade losers. However, West has led a spade and, whether or not East plays the ♠K to the first trick, you are guaranteed a trick with the ♠Q. So you need to count only two spade losers. You will also have two potential diamond losers left in your hand once the ♦A is gone. There are no club losers. Dummy's ♣A will take care of the low club in your hand. That's four potential losers - two spades and two diamonds. You are going to have to eliminate three of them.

Eliminating one of the spade losers is straightforward. You could plan to ruff the fourth round of spades in the dummy after giving up a spade trick.

Eliminating one of the diamond losers is also straightforward. The third diamond in your hand can be ruffed in dummy. To eliminate the other loser, you could plan to try the diamond finesse, hoping East holds the ♦K. That's a 50% chance.

Would it be helpful to try the club finesse?

No!

Even if it were to work, you could only discard one loser from your hand, either the fourth spade or the third diamond. Since you can ruff both those losers in dummy with no risk, taking the club finesse only risks creating an extra loser.

So it looks as though the best hope is the 50% diamond finesse, planning to lose a spade and ruff both the remaining spade loser and diamond loser in the dummy.

Is there any other chance?

There is another possibility. If you can create an extra winner in your hand on which to discard one of dummy's diamonds, you won't need to rely on the diamond finesse. You will be able to ruff both the diamond losers in dummy. Is it possible to create an extra winner in your hand?

There is the possibility of developing an extra spade winner in your hand. If, for example, the defenders' spades are divided 3-3, your fourth spade will be a winner. You could then use it to discard a diamond from dummy.

Let's see how the play might start off.

## Possible Play

West has led the ♠9. Presumably, East holds both the ♠K and ♠J. If West had started with the ♠K-9 or ♠J-9, it's unlikely West would lead the ♠9. And if West started with the ♠K-J-9, West would certainly have avoided leading the suit. Since dummy has both the ♠10 and ♠8, it's reasonable to cover the ♠9 with the ♠10. East plays the ♠K, and you win the ♠A.

There's no reason to delay drawing the defenders' trumps. You play the ♥K and both defenders follow suit. There is one heart outstanding. You draw the last trump with dummy's ♥A. Now what?

You have a straightforward 50% chance of an extra trick if the diamond finesse works. However, you can wait to try that. You're hoping you could establish an extra spade winner on which to discard a diamond from dummy. If that works, you won't need the diamond finesse.

So let's see if that will work on this deal. Suppose you play a spade to your ♠Q as East follows suit. West, unfortunately, shows out on this trick. So much for establishing an extra spade winner. East still has the ♠J-7, trapping dummy's ♠8, and East's ♠7 is a higher card than your ♠6.

It's back to relying on the diamond finesse. You cross back to dummy with the ♣A. Next, you lead a low diamond from dummy. East follows with a low diamond. You have no choice but to try the ♦Q. The finesse, however, loses to West's ♦K.

You still have to lose a trick to East's ♠J.

You can claim the rest of the tricks, but 6♥ is down one. Too bad the defenders' spades did not divide favorably and the diamond finesse lost.

Let's go back and see what else you might have done.

## Recommended Play

West has led the ♠9.

West's lead has given you an opportunity to create an extra winner in the spade suit. One possibility is to hope that the defenders' spades are divided 3-3. Is that likely?

No!

West has led the ♠9. Looking at the ♠10-8 in dummy, the ♠9 is presumably a singleton or top of a doubleton. If that's the case, can you still develop an extra spade winner?

Yes!

If West's ♠9 is from shortness, East must hold four or five spades headed by the ♠K-J. With that clue, you can turn the ♠6 into a winner!

Let's see how. Right away, you are faced with a critical decision. What should you play from dummy at trick one?

Since the plan is to develop your ♠6 into a winner, start by covering the ♠9 with the ♠10. East plays the ♠K, and you win the ♠A. Notice that the ♠A, ♠K, ♠10, and ♠9 are now gone.

You want to draw the defenders' trumps, especially since West may have led a singleton spade. Play the ♥K and both defenders follow suit. You draw the defenders' remaining trump, winning the trick in dummy because that's where you want to be to work on establishing a spade winner.

Next, you continue from dummy with the ♠8. If East plays low, you plan to play low since you "know" East holds the ♠J. East, however, covers the ♠8 with the forcing you to win the trick with the ♠Q. West shows out on this trick, discarding a club. So West did lead a singleton ♠9. Notice that now the ♠A, ♠K, ♠Q, ♠J, ♠10, ♠9, and ♠8 have already been played. The only spade left higher than the ♠6 is the ♠7... and you know who's got it.

You get back to dummy so you can lead a spade toward your hand. You can do that by playing a club to dummy's ♣A. No need to take a finesse. You lead dummy's last spade. East plays the ♠7, winning the trick. You follow suit with a low spade and now the ♠6 has become the highest-ranking spade remaining.

East leads a diamond, but you don't need to risk the diamond finesse any longer. You win the trick with the ♦A. You then play the carefully-preserved ♠6, discarding the remaining diamond from dummy. The rest is easy. One of the diamond losers can be ruffed. You get back to your hand by ruffing a club. You ruff the last diamond in dummy, and you have the rest of the tricks.

You lost one spade trick - to the ♠7 - but that's all. No need for any finesses in diamonds or clubs.

## Summary

<table class="deal">
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ T83<br>♥ AT876<br>♦ T5<br>♣ AQ8</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>♠ 9<br>♥ 42<br>♦ K9732<br>♣ J7642</td>
		<td><pre>   N<br>W     E<br>   S</pre></td>
		<td>♠ KJ754<br>♥ 5<br>♦ J84<br>♣ KT93</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>♠ AQ62<br>♥ KQJ93<br>♦ AQ6<br>♣ 5</td>
		<td></td>
	</tr>
</table>

Part of playing detective is to closely examine the opponent's opening lead. It will often provide clues about the layout of the suit led and perhaps the location of missing high cards. You can tend to trust the opponent's opening lead as a "true" card, since the defenders have to work together through their leads and signals.

On this deal, you can recognize the opening lead of the ♠9 as a likely
singleton. That places the ♠K, ♠J, and likely, ♠7 in East's hand. Armed with those clues, it's now up to you to take advantage of them.

If you had relied on the 50% diamond finesse, you would go down. Establishing the ♠6 as a winner is almost 100% after the opening lead. Those are the odds you want to go with.

## Links

[<Badge type="tip" text="Go to Practice"/>](/en/practice/prob/2024/11/29)

### By Category

[<Badge type="tip" text="<--"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/28)
[<Badge type="tip" text="Calendar"/>](/en/learning/calendar/2024/11)
[<Badge type="info" text="-->"/>](/en/learning/prob/2024/11/29#links)

### By Date

Use the links below.